"

Dog bone, stapler,

cribbage board, garlic press

     because this window is loose—lacks

suction, lacks grip.

Bungee cord, bootstrap,

dog leash, leather belt

     because this window had sash cords.

They frayed. They broke.

Feather duster, thatch of straw, empty

bottle of Elmer's glue

     because this window is loud—its hinges clack

open, clack shut.

Stuffed bear, baby blanket,

single crib newel

     because this window is split. It's dividing

in two.

Velvet moss, sagebrush,

willow branch, robin's wing

     because this window, it's pane-less. It's only

a frame of air.

"
"

The old cupola glinted above the clouds, shone

among fir trees, but it took him an hour

for the half mile all the way up the hill. As he trailed,

the village passed him by, greeted him,

asked about his health, but everybody hurried

to catch the mass, left him leaning against fences,

measuring the road with the walking stick he sculpted.

He yearned for the day when the new church

would be built—right across the road. Now

it rises above the moon: saints in frescoes

meet the eye, and only the rain has started to cut

through the shingles on the roof of his empty

house. The apple trees have taken over the sky,

sequestered the gate, sidled over the porch.

"
"

Look for me under the hood

of that old Chevrolet settled in weeds

at the end of the pasture.

I'm the radiator that spent its years

bolted in front of an engine

shoving me forward into the wind.

Whatever was in me in those days

has mostly leaked away,

but my cap's still screwed on tight

and I know the names of all these

tattered moths and broken grasshoppers

the rest of you've forgotten.

"
"

Behind the silo, the Mother Rabbit

hunches like a giant spider with strange calm:

six tiny babies beneath, each

clamoring for a sweet syringe of milk.

This may sound cute to you, reading

from your pulpit of plenty,

but one small one was left out of reach,

a knife of fur

barging between the others.

I watched behind a turret of sand. If

I could have cautioned the mother rabbit

I would. If I could summon the

Bunnies to fit him in beneath

the belly's swell

I would. But instead, I stood frozen, wishing

for some equity. This must be

why it's called Wild Life because of all the

crazed emotions tangled up in

the underbrush within us.

Did I tell you how

the smallest one, black and trembling,

hopped behind the kudzu

still filigreed with wanting?

Should we talk now of animal heritage, their species,

creature development? And what do we say

about form and focus—

writing this when a stray goes hungry, and away.

"
"

When I push your button

you fly off the handle,

old skin and bones,

black bat wing.

We're alike, you and I.

Both of us

resemble my mother,

so fierce in her advocacy

on behalf of

the most vulnerable child

who'll catch his death

in this tempest.

Such a headwind!

Sometimes it requires

all my strength

just to end a line.

But when the wind is at

my back, we're likely

to get carried away, and say

something we can never retract,

something saturated from the ribs

down, an old stony

word like ruin. You're what roof

I have, frail thing,

you're my argument

against the whole sky.

You're the fundamental difference

between wet and dry.

"
"

You are the start of the week

or the end of it, and according

to The Beatles you creep in

like a nun. You're the second

full day the kids have been

away with their father, the second

full day of an empty house.

Sunday, I've missed you. I've been

sitting in the backyard with a glass

of Pinot waiting for your arrival.

Did you know the first Sweet 100s

are turning red in the garden,

but the lettuce has grown

too bitter to eat. I am looking

up at the bluest sky I have ever seen,

cerulean blue, a heaven sky

no one would believe I was under.

You are my witness. No day

is promised. You are absolution.

You are my unwritten to-do list,

my dishes in the sink, my brownie

breakfast, my braless day.

"
"

Invisible fish swim this ghost ocean now described by waves of sand, by water-worn rock. Soon the fish will learn to walk. Then humans will come ashore and paint dreams on the dying stone. Then later, much later, the ocean floor will be punctuated by Chevy trucks, carrying the dreamers’ decendants, who are going to the store.

"
"

Don’t bother the earth spirit who lives here. She is working on a story. It is the oldest story in the world and it is delicate, changing. If she sees you watching she will invite you in for coffee, give you warm bread, and you will be obligated to stay and listen. But this is no ordinary story. You will have to endure earthquakes, lightning, the deaths of all those you love, the most blinding beauty. It’s a story so compelling you may never want to leave; this is how she traps you. See that stone finger over there? That is the only one who ever escaped.

"
"

Is anything central?

Orchards flung out on the land,

Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills?

Are place names central?

Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm?

As they concur with a rush at eye level

Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough

Thank you, no more thank you.

And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness

The damp plains, overgrown suburbs,

Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.

 

These are connected to my version of America

But the juice is elsewhere.

This morning as I walked out of your room

After breakfast crosshatched with

Backward and forward glances, backward into light,

Forward into unfamiliar light,

Was it our doing, and was it

The material, the lumber of life, or of lives

We were measuring, counting?

A mood soon to be forgotten

In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow

In this morning that has seized us again?

 

I know that I braid too much on my own

Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me.

They are private and always will be.

Where then are the private turns of event

Destined to bloom later like golden chimes

Released over a city from a highest tower?

The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you,

And you know instantly what I mean?

What remote orchard reached by winding roads

Hides them? Where are these roots?

 

It is the lumps and trials

That tell us whether we shall be known

And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star.

All the rest is waiting

For a letter that never arrives,

Day after day, the exasperation

Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is,

The two envelope halves lying on a plate.

The message was wise, and seemingly

Dictated a long time ago, but its time has still

Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited

Steps that can be taken against danger

Now and in the future, in cool yards,

In quiet small houses in the country,

Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.

"
"

Hour in which I consider hydrangea, a salt or sand plant, varietal, the question of varietals, the diet of every mother I know, 5 pounds feels like 20, I have lost … I have lost, yes, a sense of my own possible beauty, grown external, I externalize beauty. Beauty occurs on the surface of plants; the sun darkens the skin of my child, he is so small, he is beautiful (I can see; it is obvious) and everything about him is beautiful. His hand swells from the bite [spread?] of some insect[’s] venom because he is small. He appears to feel nothing. He smashes his skull against the floor. He screams. I hold him in my lap on the kitchen floor in front of an open freezer, pressing a pack of frozen clay against his forehead. He likes the cold. I see; it is so obvious. Hydrangea. When I move, when I walk pushing my child’s stroller (it is both walking and pushing or hauling, sometimes, also, lifting; it is having another body, an adjunct body composed of errand and weight and tenderness and no small amount of power), I imagine I can feel this small amount of weight, this 5 pounds like 20, interfering with the twitch of every muscle in my body. As an object, a mother is confusing, a middle-aged mother with little spare flesh, I feel every inch of major muscle pulling against gravity and against the weight of my child, now sleeping. This is the hour for thinking hydrangea. Let no man look at me. I stop to brush the drowsy child’s little eye. His face. He barely considers his mother. I am all around him. Why should he consider what is all around him? Perhaps what is missing is a subtle power of differentiation. I am in, therefore, a time of mass apprehensions.

"
"

She couldn't help but sting my finger,

clinging a moment before I flung her

to the ground. Her gold is true, not the trick

evening light plays on my roses.

She curls into herself, stinger twitching,

gilt wings folded. Her whole life just a few weeks,

and my pain subsided in a moment.

In the cold, she hardly had her wits to buzz.

No warning from either of us:

she sleeping in the richness of those petals,

then the hand, my hand, cupping the bloom

in devastating force, crushing the petals for the scent.

And she mortally threatened, wholly unaware

that I do this daily, alone with the gold last light,

in what seems to me an act of love.

"
"

I will not speak ill of Jack Flick.

I will rarely look

at the scar he made on my cheek

one summer at the lake.

I won't speak ill of Jack whose freckles

and gangly legs are gone.

So is the drained face I saw when he saw

what he'd done with a sharp rock

nonchalantly skipped.

I will speak well, for it was somewhat

sweet to lie on the dock while Jack

and his friends bent down

and wiped my face with a sandy towel.

I will speak well of them,

for most are gone

and the wound proved small.

I will speak well, for the rock

missed my eye. I can hardly find

the scar. Jack went into the air

corps, fought in one of the wars,

retired, and lived less than a year

before his tender heart gave out.

I will speak well of Jack.

"
"

How quiet is the spruce,

the wind twills

through the uppermost tier

of splayed leaves.

Now the song of a bird

like the squeaky lock

over a canoe's oar,

followed by startling chirps,

the sky pushing its clouds

like sailboats,

and I think, what kind of God

keeps himself secret

so that to find him out

we have to seek, as children do

for something like the beetle

scuttling between grass,

hidden in plain sight.

"
"

You think we are the pointed argument,

the man drunk at the party showing off

his gun collection, the bed of nettles.

 

What we really are is hidden from you:

girl weeping in the closet among her stepfather's boots;

tuft of rabbit fur caught in barbed wire; body of the baby

in the landfill; boy with the shy mouth playing his guitar

at the picnic table, out in the dirt yard.

 

We slide into this world benign and pliable,

quills pressed down smooth over back and tail.

Only one hour here stiffens the barbs into thousands

of quick retorts. Everything this well-guarded

remembers being soft once.

"
"

I planted an apple tree in memory

of my mother, who is not gone,

 

but whose memory has become

so transparent that she remembers

 

slicing apples with her grandmother

(yellow apples; blue bowl) better than

 

the fruit that I hand her today. Still,

she polishes the surface with her thumb,

 

holds it to the light and says with no

hesitation, Oh, Yellow Transparent . . . 

 they're so fragile, you can almost seeto the core. She no longer remembers how

 

to roll the crust, sweeten the sauce, but

her desire is clear—it is pie that she wants.

 

And so, I slice as close as I dare to the core—

to that little cathedral to memory—where

 

the seeds remember everything they need

to know to become yellow and transparent.

 

 

"
"

The entrance at the back of the complex

led onto a road, where an upended couch

tilted into a ditch and a washing machine

gleamed avocado beneath pine needles.

 

From the end, you turned left and left again,

then cut a trail to find the cul-de-sac

of bright brick houses. We'd walk as far

as we dared before a man pushing a mower

 

might stop to ask, ""whadda you boys need?""

That was a question we could never answer.

I loved the name of the place, White Hall,

imagined that each interior was a stretch

 

of marble perfect wall adorned by smiling

photos of the family. Our own halls

were brailled with nail holes of former

tenants, the spackled rounds of fists.

 

But doesn't longing clarify the body?

The boys I left behind: Tommy, wearing

the World War II trenching tool;

Danny, whose father, so much older

 

than the other parents, died in his recliner

one sunny afternoon while watching baseball;

Duke, who stole his mother's car and crashed

into a wall. Boys who knew when you were posing,

 

waiting for someone to say, ""smile."" Boys

who, on those latch-key days, held themselves

in narrow passages when no one

was there to show them what to do. 

 

"
"

my father’s body is a map

a record of his journey

 

he carries a bullet

lodged in his left thigh

there is a hollow where it entered

a protruding bump where it sleeps

the doctors say it will never awaken

 

it is the one souvenir he insists on keeping

mother has her own opinionsbố cùa con điên—your father is crazy

 

as a child

i wanted a scar just like my father’s

bold and appalling     a mushroom explosion

that said i too was at war

instead i settled for a grain of rice

a scar so small look closely there

here between the eyes

a bit to the right

there on the bridge of my nose

 

father says i was too young to remember

it happened while i was sleeping

leaking roof the pounding rain

drop after drop after drop

 

"
"

it has long been forgotten this practice of the mother

weaning a child she crushes the seeds of a green

chili rubs it to her nipple what the child feels

she too will   share in this act   of love

my own mother says it was not meant

to be cruel when cruelty she tells me

is a child’s lips   torn from breast as proof

back home the women wear teeth marks

 

"
"

Why are you still seventeen

and drifting like a dog after dark,

dragging a shadow you’ve found?

 

Put it back where it belongs,

and that bend of river, too. That’s not the road

you want, though you have it to yourself.

 

Gone are the cars that crawl to town

from the reactors, a parade of insects, metallic,

fuming along the one four-lane street.

 

The poplars of the shelterbelt lean away

from the bypass that never had much to pass by

but coyote and rabbitbrush.

 

Pinpricks stabbed in a map too dark to read—

I stared at stars light-years away.

Listen. That hissing? Just a sprinkler

 

damping down yesterday until it’s today.

The cottonwoods shiver, or I do,

every leaf rustling as if it’s the one

 

about to tear itself, not I.

Memory takes the graveyard shift.

 

"
"







Yes, your childhood now a legend of fountains

                                                         —jorge gullén







Yes, your childhood, now a legend

gone to weeds, still remembers the gray road

that set out to cross the desert of the future.

 

And how, always just ahead,

gray water glittered, happy to be just a mirage.

Who steps off the gray bus at the depot?

 

Sidewalks shudder all the way home.

Blinds close their scratchy eyes.

Who settles in your old room?

 

Sniffy air sprawls as if it owns the place,

and now your teenage secrets have no one to tell.

For the spider laying claim to the corner,

 

there is a stickiness to spin, that the living may beg

to be wrapped in silk and devoured,

leaving not even the flinch from memory.

"
"

               I got a call from the White House, from the

President himself, asking me if I’d do him a personal

favor. I like the President, so I said, “Sure, Mr.

President, anything you like.” He said, “Just act

like nothing’s going on. Act normal. That would

mean the world to me. Can you do that, Leon?” “Why,

sure, Mr. President, you’ve got it. Normal, that’s

how I’m going to act. I won’t let on, even if I’m

tortured,” I said, immediately regretting that “tortured”

bit. He thanked me several times and hung up. I was

dying to tell someone that the President himself called

me, but I knew I couldn’t. The sudden pressure to

act normal was killing me. And what was going on

anyway. I didn’t know anything was going on. I

saw the President on TV yesterday. He was shaking

hands with a farmer. What if it wasn’t really a

farmer? I needed to buy some milk, but suddenly

I was afraid to go out. I checked what I had on.

I looked “normal” to me, but maybe I looked more

like I was trying to be normal. That’s pretty

suspicious. I opened the door and looked around.

What was going on? There was a car parked in front

of my car that I had never seen before, a car that

was trying to look normal, but I wasn’t fooled.

If you need milk, you have to get milk, otherwise

people will think something’s going on. I got into

my car and sped down the road. I could feel those

little radar guns popping behind every tree and bush,

but, apparently, they were under orders not to stop

me. I ran into Kirsten in the store. “Hey, what’s

going on, Leon?” she said. She had a very nice smile.

I hated to lie to her. “Nothing’s going on. Just

getting milk for my cat,” I said. “I didn’t know

you had a cat,” she said. “I meant to say coffee.

You’re right, I don’t have a cat. Sometimes I

refer to my coffee as my cat. It’s just a private

joke. Sorry,” I said. “Are you all right?” she

asked. “Nothing’s going on, Kirsten. I promise

you. Everything is normal. The President shook

hands with a farmer, a real farmer. Is that such

a big deal?” I said. “I saw that,” she said, “and

that man was definitely not a farmer.” “Yeah, I

know,” I said, feeling better.

 

"
"

Of course wars, of course lice, of course limbs on opposing sides

to remind a body about ambivalence, of course orphans and empty beds and eyes

exiled for blinking in the harsh light. Of course Khrushchev gave Crimea

to the Ukraine in a blind drunk, and yes, land mines and burning skin

and of course organs, some members dismembered

to shake at strangers and their evil, and there is no way

to imagine that a man shaking a dried penis would ever utter the word darling.

Of course personal, add starch for pain, add bluing, of course hang

the laundry in the basement, there are thieves in the backyard, of course

departing trains, carload after carload of sorrow,

the man on top of a boxcar waving,

his rifle silhouetted against the white sky, its color draining

the way warmth left the Bosnian after he’d burned the last page of the last book,

knowing he had reached the end of something though it was not end enough.

Of course kisses, the stages of kissing like running borders,

endless conversations, stations of the cross, till even the promise of kissing bores you,

of course teeth gnashing, ethnic cleansing. The cynical will shrug off the past,

the future, the whole left hip of Ecuador slashed for six days of oil,

of course an X on the coats of the sick so they would stand apart

for deportation, of course rogue tumors over the body politic,

the same bodies that took Egyptian mummies and powdered them

to use as food seasoning, bon vivant cannibalism,

and yes civilized men tossed living penguins into furnaces to fuel their ships.

Of course partitions so that after the new territories were defined,

families had to line up on a cliff with bullhorns

to talk to their people on the other side,

of course courage, at times a weapon against yearning, surrender another,

a mother of course goes on setting the table, even if it’s with broken plates,

and a friend will say gently of course I want to ride with you to the funeral,

of course of course of course of course,

now then, negotiations, whatever,

palisades, the end of whimsy,

but then one evening though it is wartime,

a man climbs the hill to an amphitheater to play his cello at twilight

and history stops talking for a moment and sighs

while the melancholy of Albinoni

passes from heart to heart and each lifts a little,

the way passing a baby around a room can be sacramental,

and the memories of simple pleasures become more beautiful, the memory

of your joy on a highway to see in the next lane in a neighboring car

a clown take off his nose at the end of the day, the memory

of how your mother laid roses, sweetheart roses, on the cold grate of the fireplace,

and the sudden rain one afternoon in fall after you’d hiked far into the dells

and you huddled deep in your overcoat in the wet,

waiting out the storm with a sheep

that had come up to lean against your side

like a rock.

 

"
"

If they ask what it was like, say it was like the sea

rolling barrels of itself at you in the shadowless light of the shore,

say it was like a spider, black as night, large as a campesino’s hand,

a deepness that could balance a small world of dirt as easily as a gift

of gleaming red tomatoes held out to you eight at a time.

If they ask you how it felt, say solitary,

at first the ease of sleeping alone, warm without even a sheet,

then the nonchalance of a dirt road leading down the hill, its dust

raised and re-raised in plumes as each guest departed,

and later, say it was like the blind cat that came out of nowhere

to lie on your tile floor, lifting its face to stare with white marble eyes.

If they ask what you heard, tell them the single note of the watchman,

who coughed his one syllable when you went to bed,

and at the end of every dream when you woke with a simple plea—stay, go—again, the cough of the watchman.

If they ask about thirst, tell them no one could carry water as far

as it had to go, so that when it was time to rest,

people went to the spigot at the edge of the train tracks

and cupped their hands under the water, lowering their faces to drink.

Tell them a man could stand at noon in the park wearing nothing but underwear

and beg for hours with his cup empty.

Tell them you could sit quietly while phrases you didn't know you knew

rose up in the language there and on an undisturbed lake in your mind

you could back float—that weightless prayer that praysLet me die with my toes pointing up at the sun.

When they ask what people will eventually get around to asking,

How was the food? Tell them batata, mamón, guanábana, maní,

indigenous crops exchanging places with hunger,

giving up to the dark store window whose inventory is one hand

of bananas sold one banana at a time, giving up to little pyramids of limes

by the side of the road and the kids who tend them, dreaming

of a few coins tossed down in the dirt.

 

"
"

The prisoner can’t go any longer, but he does.

The beggar can’t go on begging, but watch—

Tomorrow he’ll be in the alley, holding out a bowl

To everyone, to even a young, possibly poorer, child.

The mother can’t go on believing,

But she will kneel for hours in the cathedral,

Holding silence in her arms.

The rain goes on, daily, sometimes, and we cry,

As often as not alone.

The fishmonger, the bell ringer, the cook, each

Can be corrupted in a less than dire way.

Nothing can replace the sea breezes you were born to.

Nothing can stay the shy ache in the palm

you hold out to the fortune-teller.

The concrete lions on her steps go on

Making bloodless journeys, they go on

Hunting in air longer than any of you will live to watch,

Hunting still after your futures become all irises

and blamelessness.

 

"
"







After Octavio Paz







What’s most human must drive

an arrow to the heart.

 

Ghosts, too, must abide by this directive

& remain transparent,

 

going about their business in old houses.

Before I was an I, I longed to be ethereal.

 

Sprouting wings at will & gliding through

cul-de-sacs and malls around the valley.

 

My hands, too, would gradually disappear

followed by my arms, then neck & head

 

until my whole body was slight as allergen.

Before I was an I, I spoke an old language

 

that would return on drowsy afternoons.

Therefore I struggled to say

 

the simplest sentences. So much so

that the maligned semicolon

 

became an ardent ally, an island

of pause and the deep breath.

 

The comma, too, bless its tiny soul,

was the crumb which the god

 

of small favors multiplied

tenfold for my morning pie.

 

Before I was an I, knowledge

clung to me like burrs & hunger

 

guided my ship like the barefoot light                on the sleeping land & sea.

 

"
"

The fearless blackbirds see me again

at the footpath beside the tall grasses

sprouting like unruly morning hair.

They caw and caw like vulgar boys

on street corners making love to girls

with their “hey mama

this” and their “hey mama that.”

But this gang of birds is much too slick.

They are my homeys of the air

with their mousse-backed hair and Crayola

black coats like small fry hoods who smoke

and joke about each other’s mothers,

virginal sisters, and the sweet arc of revenge.

These birds spurn my uneaten celery sticks,

feckless gestures, ineffective hosannas.

They tag one another, shrill and terrible,

caroling each to each my weekly wages.

But they let me pass, then flit away.

They won’t mess with me this time—

they know where I live.

 

"
"







But these, thy lovers are not dead.…They will rise up and hear your voice. . .. and run to kiss your mouth.


         –The Sphinx







In the garden of Père Lachaise,

city of the dead, we passed angels

covering their faces in shame,

& nineteenth-century trees, with tops bowed

as if their only purpose was to grieve,

& crossed the Transversales to Wilde’s grave.

 

When lovers leave, they leave their kisses

glistening on the gray slab,

on impressions of lips themselves,

a tissue of strangers’ cells

the conservators cannot leave alone,

& scrub the graffiti, as the plaque decrees

by law, no one can deface this tomb,

& still the images of lips remain,

dark gray stains of animal fat

imprisoned in limestone.

 

Lips are pressed as high as lovers

climb, against the Sphinx’s ridiculous

headdress, on the carved trumpet

of fame, & on the cheeks of its voracious face

of mindless passion flying with eyes pinched tight,

that some farsighted lover tried to open

with lines from a red pen, like a blepharoplasty,

while others kissed its sybaritic mouth

to make a poem a prophecy.

 

So here is love alive

surviving the wreckage it survives,

a lipstick envelope of hearts on their flight

to some other place, less aware,

more receiving, a final Champ de Grâce.

 

"
"

This is the poem of death.

There is only one

and no other.

 

Every one is an occasion,

one way or another,

and the last poem is this poem of death.

 

It is an occasion like no other.

I will no longer lope after elegance,

beauty’s body, or love’s wonder.

 

I will be sorry for everything

I was, and for everything I was not.

I speak to you as if you were my brother.

 

I will forgive everyone.

Death will make this possible.

There will be no other.

 

Death was in the mind

before thought or love,

in ourselves, and in our lovers.

 

The poem of death is speechless.

A companion will appear again

like another self, like your brother.

 

Enough now, enough has been said.

The spinning leaf will spin

like no other.

 

"
"

Nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel,

or what life itself eventually reveals.

 

No more studies of kindness or courtesy,

nor grace or charity, all is needless now.

 

All is needless now, sky, world, family

grieving for their bundles of purity,

 

now beyond disgrace, failure, winter streets,

or whatever attacks, and then retreats.

 

Classrooms emptied of children’s things,

paper and paste, and love’s imaginings,

 

bundles of peace, Christmas-blessed

with the unborn and the dead at rest,

 

nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel

or what life itself eventually reveals.

 

"
"

Among physicians rich in their death watch

In hallways crowded with locked wheelchairs,

Cradles of a century’s platitudes,

The stale air smelling of disinfectant

And weeping wounds enough to stupefy nurses,

Among the staring insomniacs of the day room,

The stroke victims on their rented gurneys,

Complaining orderlies and rattling carts

 

Among these in this place my father lay

At the end of everything

 

In the curved landscapes of white sheets

Abandoned finally by parents, his son,

 

The loyal company, old friends, his death

A sign of other deaths too soon to come

 

Unable to recall one life, his thoughts,

Features, he lay unknown to himself,

 

The tall hunter of pheasants out with his boy

In vellum corn and brassy orchards

 

In an autumn that never was, the proud

White-collared Ford employee lay on a bed

 

Too short for legs tattooed with red burn-rings

From daily syringes of Cytosar

 

Considered useless, still a requirement

For state funding for a body described

 

Leukemic waiting for Saturday's fiddlers

Who came to raise the spirits of the dead

 

With a music he never cared for turned

Suddenly attractive, he found genius,

 

Theirs or his like some lyrical phosphor

That shapes itself in the dry night air

 

To make a thing then make it disappear

He lay listening to the county fiddlers

 

At the end of every purpose, act and form

I leave you here, my father, in perfect accord.

 

"
"

Imagine half your face

rubbed out yet

you are suited up

and walking

to the office.

 

How will your mates

greet you?

with heavy hearts,

flowers,

rosary beads?

How shall we greet

the orphan boy,

the husband whose hand

slipped, children

and wife swept away?

 

How to greet

our new years

and our birthdays?

Shall we always

light a candle?

 

Do we remember

that time erases

the shore, grass

grows, pain’s

modified?

 

At Hikkaduwa

in 1980 I wrote a ditty,

a sailor’s song

about rain

in sunny Ceylon.

 

I don’t know

what Calypsonians

would compose

about this monstrous

wave, this blind hatchet man;

 

don’t know

the Baila singers’ reply;

we are a “happy and

go” people

yet the fisherman’s wife

 

knows

that her grandfather

was eaten by the ocean—

fisher communities

have suffered in time

 

and what’s happened

now is just another feast

for that bloody,

sleeping mother

lapping at our island;

 

but what if the ocean

were innocent,

the tectonic plates

innocent, what if God

were innocent?

 

               *

 

I do not know

how to walk upon the beach,

how to lift corpse

after corpse

until I am exhausted,

 

how to stop the tears

when half my face

has been rubbed out

beyond

the railroad tracks

 

and this anaesthetic,

this calypso come

to the last verse.

What shall we write

in the sand?

 

Where are gravestones

incinerated? Whose

ashes are these urned

and floating through a house

throttled by water?

 

Shall we build

a memorial

some calculated distance

from the sea, in a park,

in the shape of a giant wave

 

where we can write

the names of the dead?

Has the wave lost

its beauty? Is it now

considered obscene?

 

               *

 

Yet tomorrow

we must go to the ocean

and refresh ourselves

in the sea breeze

down in Hikkaduwa

 

where it is raining

in sunny Ceylon.

Tomorrow, we must

renew our vows

at sunrise, at sunset.

 

Let us say the next time

the ocean recedes

and parrots gawk

and flee, and restless

dogs insist their humans

 

wake up, we will not peer

at the revelation

of the ocean bed,

nor seek photographs.

We will run to higher ground,

 

and gathered there

with our children,

our cats, dogs,

pigs, with what we’ve

carried in our hands

 

—albums, letters—

we will make a circle,

kneel, sit,

stand in no particular

direction, pray

 

and be silent,

open our lungs

and shout thanks

to our gods

thanks to our dogs.

 

"
"

Jesus did not ride that monstrous wave,

not Yahweh, Jah, Allah, none of the major

 

Gods or the minor ones, not even the godless

strode that bugger which sliced our lives

 

in two: the past where we danced ballroom

while the children played carom, and mangos

 

stained our lapels, and today, hobbling,

scavenging in ash heaps, how easy

 

the arithmetic, day and night, two by two.

Bring on the mind workers.

 

Let a thousand doctors bloom.

I lived right here on the x, my name

 

is blue: sea green blue blue green

I do not speak in tongues. I am not

 

disordered, a babbler. I did not lose

anybody close to me, just 30,000

 

fellow island bees, not to worry, machan,

old fellow, I will subscribe tomorrow,

 

the order of every day, skip and jump rope,

whistle, talk to aid workers, even swim.

 

"
"

The elephants of reckoning

are bunches of scruff

men and women picking up

thrown out antennae

from the rubbish

bins of the city

 

to fix on their tubular

bells and horn about

by oil can fires

in the freezing midnight

of the old new year

 

We ride by their music

every hour in cabs on trains

hearing the pit pat

of our grown-wise pulse

shut in shut out

 

from the animals

of the dry season

the losers and boozers,

we must not admit our eyes

into the courtyard

 

the whimsy of chance

and our other excuses—

dollars in pocket—

to write beautiful songs

is all I ask, God

 

to do right with friends

and love a woman

and live to eighty

have people listen

to the story of my trip to America

 

The elephants of reckoning

are beaten and hungry

and walk their solitary horrors

out every sunrise slurping

coffee bought with change

 

while in some houses

freedom-bound lovers

embrace late and read Tagore

about the people working

underneath the falling of empires.

 

"
"

The King Cobra slides

through our jungles,

and tucked in bushes

by the riverbanks

the grand Kabaragoya

holds court among lizards—

 

but if you want to swim

at Mount Lavinia, or fly kites

on Galle Face Green, or ride

horse carts in the Jaffna peninsula

of your ancestors, or bear a child

in Colombo General Hospital,

 

or sleep in Cinnamon Gardens

under a mango tree,

or beg in the Borella Market,

or ride for historical reasons

on patrol boats in the Bay,

or stilt-fish off Matara down South,

 

just remember here everywhere

 

there is only man burning

and woman burning

 

here everywhere

 

in shallow graves

in deep graves

floating out of salt water

washing down the sands

 

the dead have tongues

the dead have ears

tongues are speaking to ears

 

What are they saying?

What are they saying?

 

Tell us, brown bear

bolting out of your cave.

 

Tell us, leopard

leaning on your branch.

 

Tell us, flamingos.

Bend your necks

and pour wine pour wine

 

Hoopoes, kingfishers,

cranes, have you got your messages

on the bill, are you ready

to sing? Are you going to sing?

 

Monsoon.

 

Are you going to sing?

 

Monsoon.

 

Are you going to sing?

 

Monsoon. Monsoon.

 

"
"

Kissing your lips

I try to forget roses

or the fruit of palmyra trees

sweet and strong

 

Tongue lolling upon tongue

heart beating

against heart beating,

these are my words

signifying our human bodies

which poetry does not capture,

the absolute desire I have

to kiss your lips

on this hot and sunny afternoon.

 

I do not know how much longer

I can walk about the garden

kissing roses,

 

or perambulate the toddy tavern of my dreams

where black faces and white toddy mix

in black and white memories

of Jaffna, Sri Lanka,

my Tamil countrymen

far away on an island across the sea.

 

Far away and far away

the palmyra fruit and your lips.

To drink toddy now.

To kiss your rosy lips now.

To uproot the roses in my garden

and offer them upon my tongue now.

 

To fly to Sri Lanka

and grab the last fruit on the tree

before history throws the Tamils into the sea

as is said it will do;

 

before all this and everything else,

before the apocalypse,

I do so sincerely wish,

though my words may not fit,

to rest my head in your hair

and kiss your lips.

 

"
"

in florida a giant hamster lays in bed worrying about its future

the hamster has bad eyesight

and many other problems

later that night the hamster drives its car around

listening to sad music; the master lightly drums its paws on the steering wheel

the hamster is alone

but not for long: at home three waffle friends wait

cooling inside a countertop oven in the kitchen

 

"
"

in the evening the hamster sits at the computer

watermelon juice and coffee sit by the computer

the hamster drinks all of the coffee

after a few minutes the hamster drinks all of the watermelon juice

the hamster lays its paw atop a neatly folded to-do list; this is a resourceful hamster

with a strong will, a sincere and loving hamster friend, and a confident nature

we do not need to spend any more time or empathy on this hamster

 

"
"

notice how my forehead approaches you at a high speed

notice the contortions on my face; hear and feel the impact

of my forehead against your eyebrow

never get angry if someone doesn’t do things for you

react to disappointment by being quiet and nice

and alone, not by being confrontational or frustrated

in 1952 a DSM copy-editor removed ‘headbutting’

from the entry for ‘psychopathic behavior’

thereafter the headbutt has thrived

across all social, political, and elementary school gym classes

today the headbutt is a sign of friendship, stability, and inner calm

the exponential effect of your repeated lies makes me afraid what will happen

to us; ‘the perfect headbutt’ destroys both participants and impresses

even the severely disillusioned, and the phrase ‘giant poem’ reverberates

through my head with the austerity of ancient ruins, the off-centered beauty

of repressed veganism, and the lord of the rings trilogy

I forgot what this poem was about

 

"
"

The first story I ever write

is a bright crayon picture

of a dancing tree, the branches

tossed by island wind.

I draw myself standing beside the tree,

with a colorful parrot soaring above me,

and a magical turtle clasped in my hand,

and two yellow wings fluttering

on the proud shoulders of my ruffled

Cuban rumba dancer's

fancy dress.

In my California kindergarten class,

the teacher scolds me: REAL TREES

DON'T LOOK LIKE THAT.

It's the moment

when I first

begin to learn

that teachers

can be wrong.

They have never seen

the dancing plants

of Cuba.

 

"
"

Two sets

of family stories,

one long and detailed,

about many centuries

of island ancestors, all living

on the same tropical farm...

The other side of the family tells stories

that are brief and vague, about violence

in the Ukraine, which Dad's parents

had to flee forever, leaving all their

loved ones

behind.

They don't even know if anyone

survived.

When Mami tells her flowery tales of Cuba,

she fills the twining words with relatives.

But when I ask my

Ukrainian-Jewish-American grandma

about her childhood in a village

near snowy Kiev,

all she reveals is a single

memory

of ice-skating

on a frozen pond.

Apparently, the length

of a grown-up's

growing-up story

is determined

by the difference

between immigration

and escape.

 

"
"

Mad has decided to catch a vulture,

the biggest bird she can find.

 

She is so determined, and so inventive,

that by stringing together a rickety trap

of ropes and sticks, she creates

a puzzling structure that just might

be clever enough to trick a buzzard,

once the trap’s baited with leftover pork

from supper.

 

Mad and I used to do everything together,

but now I need a project all my own,

so I roam the green fields,

finding bones.

 

The skull of a wild boar.

The jawbone of a mule.

 

Older cousins show me

how to shake the mule’s quijada,

to make the blunt teeth

rattle.

 

Guitars.

Drums.

Gourds.

Sticks.

 

A cow bell.

A washboard.

Pretty soon, we have

a whole orchestra.

 

On Cuban farms, even death

can turn into

music.

 

"
"

Newsmen call it the Cuban Missile Crisis.

Teachers say it's the end of the world.

At school, they instruct us to look up

and watch the Cuban-cursed sky.

Search for a streak of light.

Listen for a piercing shriek,

the whistle that will warn us

as poisonous A-bombs

zoom close.

Hide under a desk.

Pretend that furniture is enough

to protect us against perilous flames.

Radiation. Contamination. Toxic breath.

Each air-raid drill is sheer terror,

but some of the city kids giggle.

They don't believe that death

is real.

They've never touched a bullet,

or seen a vulture, or made music

by shaking

the jawbone

of a mule.

When I hide under my frail school desk,

my heart grows as rough and brittle

as the slab of wood

that fails to protect me

from reality's

gloom.

"
"

I have come to realize the body is its own pyre, that degree

rises from within, the fatty acids a kind of kindling.

Like a scientist in a lab, this much I have established, blood jelled

like gasoline, the years spread before me like a map

pinned with targets, where I’m raging even now.

It works both ways. Clear the forests to see your enemies

and your enemies see you clearly. Like all effective incendiaries,

I won’t only bloom where I’m planted.

 

"
"







And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out onto the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him and this is what they saw.

—C. S. Lewis, The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe







Tonight we will function like women.

The snow has gone away, the ice with its amniotic glare.

I clasp my sister’s tiny hand.

We will not turn away

Though spring, spring with its black appetite,

Comes seeping out of the earth.

 

The lion was sad. He suffered us

To touch him. When I placed the bread of my hands

In his mammalian heat, I was reminded

That the world outside this world

Is all vinegar and gall, that to be a young girl at the foot of a god

Requires patience. Timing.

 

The White Witch has mustered her partisans.

Because I am fascinated by her bracelets strung with baby teeth,

I will remember her as the woman

Who grins with her wrists. From my thicket of heather

I note that in her own congenital way

She is pure, that tonight she ushers something new into the world.

 

I cannot stop it. I cannot stop it just as in that other place

I could not keep the planes with their spiked fires from coming.

Though in this closed realm the smell of camphor is overwhelming

I have nothing but my hands to use

In ministering to the dead. Here too

My hands must suffice.

 

Hush now while I testify. They are shaving him.

The corona of his mane falls away

Like pieces of money. In the moon’s milk light

Her bangled wrists grin as she raises the blade.

Something is diffused. In whatever world he comes again

There will be women like us who choose to.

 

"
"

Somebody says draw a map. Populate it with the incidents

of your childhood. Mark the spot where the lake receded

after a winter of light snow. The stairs on which someone

slapped you. The place where the family dog hung itself

by jumping over the back fence while still on the dog run,

hours later its body like a limp flag on a windless day.

Draw a map, someone says. Let yourself remember.

In the refugee camp a hundred thousand strong

draw the stony outcrop from which you could no longer see

the plume of smoke that was your village. Draw a square

for the bathroom stall where Grandpa hid each day

in order to eat his one egg free from the starving eyes

of his classmates, an X for the courthouse where you and he

were naturalized, a broken line for the journey. Draw a map,

Jon says. Let it be your way into the poem. Here is where

that plane filled with babies crashed that I was not on.

Here is where I was ashamed. On the second floor

at Pranash University the people wait their turn. Have you

drawn your map, Jon asks. He has rolled up his sleeves.

Forty-five minutes to noon the Prince stands up and says

that the monks must be excused. We watch them file out,

saffron robes as if their bodies have burst into blossom.

Draw a map. Fly halfway around the globe. Here is the room

next to the library where you realize how poor your tradition is,

the local people with poetic forms still in use that date back

to the time of Christ. Tell us about your map. Explain

how these wavy lines represent the river, this rectangle

the school-turned-prison where only seven

escaped with their lives. This is my map. This star the place

where I sat in a roomful of people among whom not one

was not touched by genocide. Every last map resplendent with death

though nobody knows where their loved ones lie buried.

How many times can I appropriate a story that is not mine to tell?

The woman stands up and says she is not a poet, that she

doesn’t have the words. She points to a triangle on a piece of paper.

Here is the spot where she found human bones in the well

of her childhood home, and how her mother told herdon’t be afraid because it was not the work of wild animals.

"
"

Listen closely as I sing this. The man standing at the gate

tottering on his remaining limb is a kind of metronome, his one

leg planted firmly on the earth. Yes, I have made him beautiful

 

because I aim to lay all my cards on the table. In the book review

the critic writes, “Barry seeks not to judge but to understand.”

Did she want us to let her be, or does she want

 

to be there walking the grounds of the old prison on the hill

of the poison tree where comparatively a paltry twenty thousand

died? In the first room with the blown up

 

black-and-white of a human body gone abstract someone has

to turn and face the wall not because of the human pain

represented in the photo but because of her calmness,

 

the tranquility with which she tells us that her father

and her sister and her brother were killed. In graduate school

a whole workshop devoted to an image of a woman with bleach

 

thrown in the face and the question of whether or not

the author could write, “The full moon sat in the window

like a calcified eye, the woman’s face aglow with a knowingness.”

 

I felt it come over me and I couldn’t stop. I tried to pull myself

together and I couldn’t. They were children. An army of child

soldiers. In the room papered with photos of the Khmer Rouge

 

picture after picture of teenagers, children whose parents

were killed so that they would be left alone in the world

to do the grisly work that precedes paradise.

 

And the photos of the victims, the woman holding her newborn

in her arms as her head is positioned in a vise, in this case

the vise an instrument not of torture

 

but of documentation, the head held still as the camera captures

the image, the thing linking all their faces, the abject fear

and total hopelessness as exists

 

in only a handful of places in the history of the visible world.

For three $US per person she will guide you through what was

Tuol Sleng prison, hill of the strychnine tree.

 

Without any affectation she will tell you the story of how

her father and her sister and her brother went among

the two million dead. There are seventy-four forms

 

of poetry in this country and each one is still meant to be sung.

 

"
"

Say, when we woke those icy spring mornings they were still there.

The upper portion of their faces long ruined but you could still see

                                        the meaning in their hands,

 

palms once covered in gold. We knew better than to call them

by their names, Light that Shines Throughout the Universe

                         and His consort, but there were stories

 

of  travelers lost  in the foothills of  the Hindu  Kush and a distant

brilliance that led them home. The way a candle physically enters

                                        your body after it has been

 

snuffed out. The pearly smoke suffused in the air. In one school

hundreds  of  miles  away  all  the   girls  my age  were  poisoned,

                              and last week outside the capital

 

a woman like my  sister was shot dead  in front of a crowd by two men

who forced their bodies into her body and then judged her an infidel

                                        so they could kill her

 

and be done with it.  After the  visitors were blasted I had a dream.

I saw a human man standing by a lake and no one was looking at him

                                          directly. His image

 

on the surface of the water cleaner than anything in this world.

In   my   dream  the  man   said,  “Thousands   of  lifetimes  ago

                                        when my body was cut

 

into pieces by an evil king, I was not caught up in the idea of the self.”

Then  in  my   dream  someone   picked  up  a rock  and  I  woke  up.

                              It took almost a month,

 

the  great  heads  drilled with holes,  then anti-aircraft  tanks rolled in.

Each hundred-foot niche now empty but each cavity left shaped like us,

                              like a person. Before it happened

 

we talked about it. Grandfather said don’t they have a share in heaven?

Second Aunt said it was more realistic this way. God not in heaven

                                        but in exile.

 

"
"

The   first    great    poet  of

the  crisis  the   one  whose

generation   was  left  as  if

firebombed     though      if

you    look     back   at    the

seminal    work    you   will

see  that only a  handful of

 

of   the   poems    explicitly

touch   on   that  dark time

the    blood    filling     with

virulence    and   the  night

always          black         and

spangled   with  stars  says

when           faced         with

 

difficult      material      the

poet       should          begin

obliquely      creeping     in

from   the   edge  a  square

of         light             moving

imperceptibly   across  the

floor as    the earth    turns

 

and   so   I   will   tell    you

that  ever  since  I saw  the

footage           of              the

journalists   hiding  in  the

attic      the    rope    ladder

pulled     up     after    them

only     the       one       with

 

foreign   papers    left     to

stand   her   ground  down

below   the   journalist    at

first     calmly    sitting   on

the      couch      but     then

huddling  in  a   cabinet  as

the     soldiers    enter    the

 

apartment     next       door,

the   cries   of   the  mother

floating       through       the

wall       ib’ni       ib’ni     the

language     ancient       like

something       whetted   on

stone     the   way   I   image

 

language      would        have

sounded     in     the  broken

mouth    of     King      DavidAbsalom        Absalom    the

man-child       hanging     by

the    shining    black   noose

of     his     own    hair  in the

 

fragrant         woods           of

Ephraim       ib’ni           ib’ni

next    door    the   sound  of

a    body      being     dragged

from     the    apartment    as

his            mother           wails

into      the        dark        how

 

many     mothers   and   how

many     sons    dragged   out

into    a       night     spangled

with             stars          where

everything    is  a   metaphor

for      virulence      my     son my   son   and   ever  since  I

 

saw    a   clip  of the   footage

the       foreign        journalist

managed   to    smuggle   out

of   the  country   images   of

the        journalist       herself

hiding   in   a   space   meant

for   buckets   and   rags    as

 

next     door    the     soldiers

drag    away   a   young   boy

please     hear     it   again   a

child    of    no    more   than

twelve         his        mother’s

lamentations             forever

seared   in    the    blood   of

 

this    thing   I   call  my  life

but     really     what     is    it

what   is   this  light  I   hold

so   dear  it  wants   to move

imperceptibly    across   the

floor    as   the   earth   turns

so     as   not     to      become

 

too       aware      of      itself?

"
"

Nowhere    in   the     Halakha’s     five   thousand   years   of   rules

does   it     specifically    state    Thou     shall     not     [                      ]

but     sometimes    tradition    carries    more     weight    than    law

 

and   so   for    much   of   the    past    year   we    have   not    talked

about     what    will    happen    on     Thursday,    how   the    cervix

will     start     its     slow    yawn,     the     pelvic      floor     straining

 

as         the           head        crowns,      the      fontanelles     allowing

the       bony        panes       of       the      skull     to      pass    through

until,     over    the   next    24   months,    the   five   cranial   plates

 

gradually      ossify,     the      head      forming    its     own    helmet

as     structures     harden    over   the    soft    meats   of  the  brain,

nor     do   we    talk   about    the   colostrum  sunny  as egg   yolks

 

now   collecting  in   your   breasts,   the    thing’s   first   nutrients

already    ready    and    waiting,    the     event    just    days   away

and   still  we  do  not  talk  about it, the mass growing inside you

 

tucked    up    safe     in   the     leeward   side    under    the   heart

because   sometimes   our   god   is   a  jealous god,   the evil   eye

lidless    and    all-seeing.  Instead  we  will wait  until  it is  done,

 

until  the  creature  has been  cleaned and wrapped in soft cloth,

the    bloody     cord   that    binds    you    severed.    And   maybe

you       will      name      it      Dolores,      which       means     grief,

 

or perhaps you will call it Mara, the Hebrew name for bitterness

because       this      is      how     we      protect     what     we    love,

by   hiding   what  it   truly  means  to   us,  the little  bag  of  gold

 

we    keep   buried   in  the  yard,   the  thing  we will do anything

to      keep      safe,      even    going     so      far    as    to     pretend

it    doesn’t    exist,   that   there’s   nothing  massing in  the  dark

 

despite  the steady  light  emanating  from  your  face, a radiance

so bright sometimes I can’t look at you, the joy so  overpowering

you     want    to     shout   it     from   the    highest    mountaintop

 

straight into God’s ear.

 

"
"

One day we will all be like this—the boat’s sickening pitch, & the delicateness

     needless, consumable.

 

How everything here naturally passes into night, a room

     w/o walls.

 

Could mindlessness keep us alive? Could bright colors?

 

Tonight I am thinking of the young woman who dreams of her father

     being shot in the head. Imagine needing to believe the one you love

     has been destroyed.

 

Now it is after midnight—the spindrift lunar & diaphanous. Here alone on deck

     could I make peace w/it all in thirty seconds—the water’s inherent rising, the gasping

     for air?

 

I have never seen such omnipresence, such vast dreamlessness—  

     but I too am such things.

 

What does it mean to be eroded? What would be the significance of slipping one leg

     over the rail & straddling the indifference?

 

Yes. Once upon a time we spent three days on a boat out of Kobé, Japan.

 

All night the waves. All night the somnambulistic urges.

 

Or how as children we would swim in a hard rain—the lake’s surface ragged & torn,

     but underneath

 

the roots of the water lilies like ladders

     trailing down into the marvelous.

 

"
"

Shagged-gold, at rest the great haunches

as if axled, fur sleeked like a butter rug.

In the Serengeti sun, the male’s harem

 

like a solar system, each lady kept

exclusive, her seasonal heat for him alone,

estrous belly pressed to the ground,

 

then the male’s riding her musculature—

throughout evolution the cat’s barbed penis

nicking his breached mate as he dismounts.

 

See the deliberate walk, cool as a criminal,

the multi-jointed forepaws placed consciously

even by the usurped king, his eye teeth blacked,

 

his tail rotted off, tired wag of a bloody stump

as he finally falls dying, the crucified face bedded

in its wheel of hair, the tawny miscegenated eyes

 

binocular in breadth. Shark in the long grasses.

Shark in the long grass. Smell everywhere, the gazelle

with its small-headed splendor gracing the plains

 

is ambushed, devoured, its horned bone rack

souvenired, the murderer’s ripping muzzle crimsoned.

In the despot’s sons’ palace of pure gold

 

the three in the iron cage lazing like statues.

When the American unlocks the hinged door

our shackled hearts contract. Unhooded and naked

 

we are pushed into their presence,

and for a shining moment the animals study us,

these fabulous aliens.

 

Here in a desert captivity

snatched from the baobab’s sour fruit,

their swagged bellies shifted, broken, and resignedly

 

the ancient drive rose up only in one—

its head wreathed beyond sorrow

as it slouched out of the habitual darkness,

 

the permanent rictus of its terrible mouth

pain-struck. The thing came toward me

with its ruined light, and I saw affliction in it.

 

Dream of mastery. Dream of being wholly consumed,

freed. I am the lion and the lion is me.

Then the American pulls us out.

 

"
"

Literally the thing has been gutted, a ragged gash

carved under its tail to midway up its chest, eyes

like stagnant water, horns intricate as a woodwind.

Where did the viscera go? Where do the viscera ever go?

I am in a car driving to the northernmost point

on this spit. Porte de Mort. Death’s Northern Door.

Literally where my grandmother lives. Her 89-year-old cousin

has just fallen out a window but is all right, the bruises

 

like stained glass. Enthusiasm. To be in God.

My grandmother says it is proof, and I nod my head

because I too would like to live in such a world

where an eighty-nine year old crawls out a window

and falls seven feet to the ground, in turn the miracle

of her body stained a deep blue, vitreous. In one room

of the unfinished mansion where we will celebrate the day,

the ninety-year-old matriarch sleeps in her four-poster bed

 

under the canopy of a wedding dress, its hundred eyelets

a fallacy. After dinner someone will hand around an indulgence

of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa, the lady’s dark cheek

marred as if she has been scratched. Who at this table

fled the police? Who left that place in flames, the rubble

of infinite hearths? The deer’s eyes like perfect cataracts,

the evidence cooling. When I think of my room in the earth,

I can’t breathe. A friend of a friend recently hit a small bear

 

with his car. At the end of my favorite novel a bear

is dancing on a makeshift stage, the bear a grotesquerie

like the rest of us. No one stopped to help,

said my friend. Traffic barely slowed. I do not judge this,

 

or even the surreptitious footage of the workers

somewhere on the killing floor, stomping

the breast-heavy creatures with their rubber boots.

How we raise them not to fly, what should waft

 

gnostically through the air, the hollowness of evolving.

My heart is doing that thing again, saying climb the stairs

on your knees. I tell a friend a man halfway across the world

has been killed, torn apart by motorbikes, each limb

tied in a different direction. Could a universe be born this way?

One minute you are scarping the silvery bark off a birch

when it comes to you forever and there you lie

in the bed of a blood-smeared truck at a stoplight

 

on Highway 41 because this is the season of messages.

The man was a teacher. He taught girls.

When they came for him he told his children

not to cry. Then the men took out half his bowel,

the viscera steaming as they do, and they tied him

ingeniously in such a way that they tore him apart.

In that other place three million of us died. When I left,

I left them all behind. In the unfinished mansion

 

someone will ask me what I’m thankful for.

What to say? That one of the most beautiful things

I have ever seen was a paper nest secreted by wasps,

and that in the summer I would sleep under it,

the runnelled mass turning like a planet in the moonlight?

I will admit I was in favor of war and now look what’s happened.

At the end of the road the man driving the truck will eat

the deer. If I had to watch someone be torn apart by motorbikes

 

I would still be me, which is the horror of it all.

 

"
"

I am ten.

My mother sits in a black

rocking chair in the parlor

and tells stories of a country school

surrounded by ricefields

and no roads.

 

I stand in the kerosene light

behind her,

earning my allowance.

A penny

for each white hair I pull.

 

"
"







—for James I. Ina







1.

The emotion of trucks, buses & troop trains

brings them here,

to the wrong side of another state.

A woman at the Klamath Falls depot

calls it the wrong side of the ocean.

 

2

Crumbs hide around the table legs

in the mess hall,

dishes & silverware

clink a strange song.

Families talk across long tables.

Questions drop like puzzles

to the unfinished floor.

 

3

Blocks away from their new home

a woman finds a latrine

not backed up. Stands

in line, waiting her turn

in the wind. Down

the center of the open room:

12 toilet stools, six pair,

back to back. Sits down

and asks for privacy,

holding a towel in front of her

with trembling hands.

 

4

In a North Dakota prisoner-of-war camp,

surrounded by Germans & Italians,

a quiet man

hammers a samurai sword from scrap metal

at night in a boiler room.

A secret edge

to hold against the dark mornings.

 

He sends love notes to his pregnant wife

in Tule Lake

sewn in pants

mailed home for mending.

His censored letters

mention a torn pocket.

She finds the paper near the rip,

folded & secret in the lining.

 

White voices

claim the other side of the ocean

is so crowded

the people want to find death

across the phantom river.

Headlines shake their nervous words.

Out on the coast

beach birds print their calligraphy

in the sand.

It is such a small country.

 

"
"







—displayed in the Weaverville Museum







It is the picture of a man who dreams

at night, his dreams a cartoon color

he can’t forget in his blue cell:

a fork chases a hard-boiled egg

across the smooth paper,

cheered on by an angry alarm clock.

The clock rings

and the artist knows it is morning

even though the iron cell

is in a basement with no windows.

 

In the center of the painting

the devil blows a whistle

and his pitchfork drips blood.

Above in the night

a man has taken off in a Buck Rogers spaceship

heading for a yellow one-eyed moon.

He grips the steering wheel in the open cockpit

and doesn’t look back.

 

In a lower corner

under a naked tree

a satyr sits and plays his pan-flute.

The notes weave all around the painting,

twist around a girl

dancing in veils.

 

The man who dreams all this

pulls at his covers,

drowses at the bottom of the painting.

 

The man who painted this

died in his dreams.

 

"
"







—after Frank O’Hara







You have been smiling across the table at your date

with a sesame seed stuck in your teeth.

 

You will gain sophistication, become accepted by Reader’s Digest, and retire in Puyallup.

 

In your next life you will be a teacher

and no one will ever call you by your first name.

 

After your next vacation you will come home

and discover that your neighbors have redecorated

in the style of Iowa trailer court.

 

If you feel like you’re getting old,

secretly plant zucchini in your neighbor’s flowerbeds.

 

Avoid people who iron their sheets

or roll their socks & underwear.

 

Painting and poetry and music will show us where we should

be going, not the senate or tv news.

 

The next thermos bottle you see will actually

be a listening device made in Korea.

 

All the people in this restaurant

are glad that they are not you.

 

"
"

The sky wants the water to turn grey,

but if I notice how waves

 

play with the clumps of yellow flags,

or the way turtles share logs,

 

or even try to understand a friend’s decision

to walk onto a glacier

 

and end her life—I will be ready

for any poems that have been waiting.

 

The horizon opens as I walk,

escorted by swans and Canada geese.

 

I need to stop backpedaling into the present.

In my old life people would straighten

 

the truth, but the river

flows in curves.

 

The names of my father and my mother

rest next to each other in Greenwood Cemetery.

 

The distance between me and the mountains

measures an uneven thought: I feel like an orphan.

 

An early moon is just a piece of change

in the softening sky.

 

Light is such an actress. Time to seek

Hopper’s wish to simply paint sunlight

 

on the wooden wall of a house. I am growing

older. Maru in Japanese means

 

the ship

will make it back home.

 

"
"

No, I am not deformed.

I wear these socks

Because I haven't any gloves,

And my fingers are bitten with frost.

They feel like stumps.

Luckily, I finished covering

The citrus tree with sheets of burlap.

Before darkness,

I will light a smudge pot

Near the mummified trunk,

Then anoint my hands in a blue salve.

Yesterday was cold

But the freeze is on now.

I must remind myself

Not to lick any cars.

Mr. Nishizawa, a house over,

Told me his nephew

Lost a fourth of his tongue

For that reason. Years ago,

The rosebushes were ruined to a freeze

And have never come back.

If needed, I will stay up all night

And pray, will let the hoarfrost

Burn in my chest. My grandfather

Ate the yield from this tree

After he died. I saw him.

 

"
"

That boy, the champion breath holder,

Kenji Takezo, lost his title

This year to Mack Stanton

A retired truck driver

New to the area.

Held in the town swimming pool

Thirty-five participants inhaled

Deeply all at once

Submerged the depth.

The contest went on into twilight.

One by one each person

Came up sucking air.

Kenji was the town favorite.

We wanted him to win again.

He trained so hard,

It was the only real talent

He had

Other than surfing and making

Trouble. When he surfaced

Second to last

Gulping the night

Then vomiting water,

We were disappointed.

He was doing so well.

He had his lucky twenty-pound brick

Cradled in his lap.

It kept him down.

But that trucker Mack was too good.

He read

Comic books, aloud, underwater.

We watched from the bleachers

His laughter bursting above him.

Kenji saw this too.

He never had anybody

Read to him

Not even his mother,

And he wanted to hear

What was being read

What his opponent found so funny.

 

"
"

After Kenji Takezo fell from a wave,

The turbulence of whitewash confused

His sense of direction.

He breathed in

When he should have

 

Held tight. By accident, he swallowed

The Pacific. The water poured down his throat,

A blue cascade he could not see.

He felt in his stomach

The heavy life of the ocean.

 

It wasn’t funny, but he giggled

When a school of fish tickled his ribs.

He went home, the surf not rideable,

It was no longer there,

The water weighted in his belly.

 

That night, while he slept, the tide moved.

The long arms of the moon

Reached inside him pulling the Pacific free.

When he woke the next morning,

He lay in a puddle of ocean that was his.

 

"
"

Steel horses nodding

In the petroleum field are beasts

That suck

The crude of earth.

They have lived here for as long as I

Remember. This moment,

 

I smell wild incense:

Heather, abducted by a desert wind.

Its growth hides

The rain-carved ribs of the foothills.

Evening swallows

The city fasting on late fall.

 

Years ago, after hearing the story

About a boy who lost

Both legs while playing on an oil pump,

I was dared to straddle one.

All my friends were there to watch

The Pacific behind me burning with dusk.

 

The brute lifted me to the sky,

Where I merged with the twilight,

A warm breeze embracing my back.

None of them noticed

The world stopped to breathe.

When I looked, they disappeared.

 

Nearby in pink-flowered bushes

Someone found

The girl who’d been missing for weeks.

They stood in awe, the body

Decomposing, while I rode

The slow bucking animal.

 

Two months later, off the same pump,

A man dove,

An imperfect swan into night.

He landed in the dirt gully

Breaking the soft, white wings

He never had.

 

Today, I catch in my hand

An insect charged with lightning.

It tickles

The obscure scoop of my palm

As I hold it to my mouth and explain

A wish so simple

 

By morning I will have forgotten it.

I release

The bug to a desert wind

That is racing toward the sea,

A brutal dryness in its wake.

Fire in the hills everywhere.

 

"
"

About the only thing I thought I knew

was that nothing I’d ever know would do

any good. Sunrise, say, or that the part

of the horse’s hoof that most resembles

a human palm is called the frog;

certain chords on the guitar of no mercantile use;

the abstruse circuitry of an envelope

quatrain; even the meaning of horripilation.

 

Sometimes on a flatland mound the ancients had made,

I took heart in the pointlessness of stars

and lay there until my teeth chattered.

I earned my last Boy Scout merit badge

building a birdhouse out of license plates

manufactured by felons in the big house.

No more paramilitary organizations for me,

I said, ten years before I was drafted.

 

I had skills. Sure-footedness and slick

fielding. Eventually I would learn to unhook

a bra one-handed, practicing on my friend,

his sister's worn over his T-shirt (I took

my turns too). One Easter Sunday I hid

through the church service among the pipes

of the organ and still did not have faith,

although my ears rang until Monday.

 

I began to know that little worth knowing

was knowable and faith was delusion.

I began to believe I believed in believing

nothing I was supposed to believe in,

except the stars, which, like me,

were not significant, except for their light,

meaning I loved them for their pointlessness.

I believed I owned them somehow.

 

A C major 7th chord was beautiful and almost rare.

The horse I loved foundered and had to be

put down. The middle rhyme in an envelope

quatrain was not imprisoned if it was right.

In cold air a nipple horripilates

and rises, the sun comes up and up and up,

a star that bakes the eggs

in a Boy Scout license plate birdhouse.

 

God was in music and music was God.

A drill sergeant seized me by my dog tag

chain and threatened to beat me

to a pile of bloody guts for the peace sign

I’d chiseled in the first of my two tags,

the one he said they’d leave in my mouth

before they zipped the body bag closed.

Yet one more thing I’d come to know.

 

He also said that Uncle Sam owned my ass,

no more true than my ownership

of the stars. I can play a C major 7th chord

in five or six places on the neck of a guitar.

A stabled horse’s frog degrades; a wild horse’s

becomes a callus, smooth as leather.

Stars are invisible in rainy weather,

something any fool knows, of course.

 

"
"

The first space shuttle launch got delayed until

Sunday, so we had to watch the shuttle’s return

to Earth in class instead—PS113’s paunchy black

& white rolled in, the antennae on top adjusted

sideways & down for better reception. That same

day, Garrett stole my new pencil box. That same

day, Cynthia peed her jeans instead of going

to the bathroom & letting Garrett steal her pencil

box. Both of us too upset to answer questions about

space flight, so we got sent to the back of the class.

I smelled like the kind of shame that starts a fight

on a Tuesday afternoon. Cynthia smelled like pee

& everyday Jordache. The shuttle made its slick way

back to Earth, peeling clouds from the monochromatic

sky & we all—even the astronomically marginal—

were winners. American, because a few days before,

a failed songwriter put a bullet in the president

in the name of Jodie Foster. The shuttle looked

like a bullet, only with wings & a cockpit, & when

it finally landed, the class broke into applause

& the teacher snatched a thinning American flag

from the corner, waved it back & forth in honor

of our wounded president & those astronauts.

 

"
"

blacks painted onto bricks & split vinyl on the East Side,

jaws as tight as window locks with the curtains drawn

& behind that diligent fabric: blacks already tucked

into homemade forts—folding chairs, wobbly backbones

& the whole, snowy world waiting outside like ghost

stories whispered around the last sputtering match. & later,

top sheets pulled up over heads from fear of mirrors

at midnight or some backfired beater’s rusty pop pop pop

after the key twists at the edge of the week. No doubt:

Tuesday is the scariest day in Section 8, but Friday is right

after it in the suburbs. & after those trembling weekdays,

even more blacks with money disappearing & reappearing

as unexpectedly as poltergeists inside of TVs & haunted

trees with fast fingers in West Side yards. & still not

a wavelength of any kind for a black to put in the bank.

The inks in everybody’s hatted & contracting checkbooks

don’t change black. Some front-row architecture might.

Some guns, too, & their loud, colorful opportunities:

whatever version of black is inside a fist around a grip.

Not a color, really—more like the face a man makes in

the glinting face of a gun pointed at him every single day.

 

"
"

This is the g-dropping vernacular

     I am stuck in. This is the polyphone

where my head is an agrarian gang

     sign pointing like a percussion mallet

to a corn maze in one of the smaller

     Indiana suburbs where there aren’t

supposed to be black folks. Be cool & try

     to grin it off. Be cool & try to lean

it off. Find a kind of black & bet on it.

     I’m grinning to this vernacular

like the big drum laugh tracks a patriotic

     marching band. Be cool & try to ride

the beat the same way me, Pryor,

     & Ra did driving across the 30th Street

Bridge, laughing at these two dudes

     with big afros like it’s 1981 peeing into

the water & looking at the stars. Right

     before Officer Friendly hit his lights.Face the car, fingers locked behind

     your heads. Right after the fireworks

started popping off. Do I need to call 

     the drug dog? Right after the rattling

windows, mosquitoes as busy in my ears

     as 4th of July traffic cops. Right before

the thrill of real planets & pretend planets

     spun high into the sky, Ra throwing up

three West Side fingers, each ringed

     by pyrotechnic glory & the misnomer

of the three of us grinning at the cop’s club

     down swinging at almost the exact same

time Pryor says, Cops put a hurting on your

     ass, man. & fireworks light up in the same

colors as angry knuckles if you don’t

     duck on the double. Especially on the West

Side—more carnivorous than almost any

     other part of Earth Voyager saw when

it snapped a blue picture on its way out

     of this violently Technicolor heliosphere.

 

"
"

Leaves scarcely breathing

in the black breeze;

the flickering swallow

draws circles in the dusk.

 

In my loving

dying heart

a twilight is coming,

a last ray, gently reproaching.

 

And over the evening forest

the bronze moon climbs to its place.

Why has the music stopped?

Why is there such silence?

 

"
"

The clock-cricket singing,

that’s the fever rustling.

The dry stove hissing,

that’s the fire in red silk.

 

The teeth of mice milling

the thin supports of life,

that’s the swallow my daughter

who unmoored my boat.

 

Rain-mumble on the roof—

that’s the fire in black silk.

But even at the bottom of the sea

the bird-cherry will hear ‘good-bye’.

 

For death is innocent,

and the heart,

all through the nightingale-fever,

however it turns, is still warm.

"
"

Let us praise the twilight of freedom, brothers,

the great year of twilight!

A thick forest of nets has been let down

into the seething waters of night.

O sun, judge, people, desolate

are the years into which you are rising!

                     

Let us praise the momentous burden

that the people’s leader assumes, in tears.

Let us praise the twilight burden of power,

its weight too great to be borne.

Time, whoever has a heart

will hear your ship going down.

 

We have roped swallows together

into legions.

Now we can’t see the sun.

Everywhere nature twitters as it moves.

In the deepening twilight the earth swims into the nets

and the sun can’t be seen.

 

But what can we lose if we try one

groaning, wide, ungainly sweep of the rudder?

The earth swims. Courage,

brothers, as the cleft sea falls back from our plow.

Even as we freeze in Lethe we’ll remember

the ten heavens the earth cost us.

 

"
"

Let me be in your service

like the others

mumbling predictions,

mouth dry with jealousy.

Parched tongue

thirsting, not even for the word—

for me the dry air is empty

again without you.

 

I’m not jealous any more

but I want you.

I carry myself like a victim

to the hangman.

I will not call you

either joy or love.

All my own blood is gone.

Something strange paces there now.

Another moment

and I will tell you:

it's not joy but torture

you give me.

I'm drawn to you

as to a crime—

to your ragged mouth,

to the soft bitten cherry.

Come back to me,

I'm frightened without you.

Never had you such power

over me as now.

Everything I desire

appears to me.

I'm not jealous any more.

I'm calling you.

 

"
"

Whoever kisses time’s ancient nodding head

will remember later, like a loving son,

how the old man lay down to sleep

in the drift of wheat outside the window.

He who has opened the eyes of the age,

two large sleepy apples with inflamed lids,

hears forever after the roar of rivers

swollen with the wasted, lying times.

 

The age is a despot with two sleepy apples

to see with, and a splendid mouth of earth.

When he dies he’ll sink onto the numb

arm of his son, who’s already senile.

I know the breath growing weaker by the day

Not long not till the simple song

of the wrongs of earth is cut off,

and a tin seal put on the lips.

 

O life of earth! O dying age!

I’m afraid no one will understand you

but the man with the helpless smile

of one who has lost himself.

O the pain of peeling back the raw eyelids

to look for a lost word, and with lime

slaking in the veins, to hunt

for night herbs for a tribe of strangers!

 

The age. In the sick son’s blood the deposit of lime

is hardening. Moscow’s sleeping like a wooden coffin.

There’s no escaping the tyrant century.

After all these years the snow still smells of apples.

I want to run away from my own doorstep,

but where? Out in the street it’s dark,

and my conscience glitters ahead of me

like salt strewn on the pavement.

 

Somehow I’ve got myself set for a short journey

through the back lanes, past thatched eaves, starling houses,

an everyday passer-by, in a flimsy coat,

forever trying to button the lap-robe.

Street after street flashes past,

the frozen runners crunch like apples;

can’t get the button through the button-hole,

it keeps slipping out of my fingers.

 

The winter night thunders

like iron hardware through the Moscow streets.

Knocks like a frozen fish, or billows in steam,

flashing like a carp in a rosy tea-room.

Moscow is Moscow again. I say hello to her.

‘Don’t be stern with me; never mind.

I still respect the brotherhood

of the deep frost, and the pike’s justice.’

 

The pharmacy’s raspberry globe shines onto the snow.

Somewhere an Underwood typewriter’s rattled.

The sleigh-driver’s back, the snow knee-deep,

what more do you want? They won't touch you, won’t kill you.

Beautiful winter, and the goat sky

has crumbled into stars and is burning with milk.

And the lap-robe flaps and rings

like horse-hair against the frozen runners.

 

And the lanes smoked like kerosene stoves,

swallowed snow, raspberry, ice,

endlessly peeling, like a Soviet sonatina,

recalling nineteen-twenty.

The frost is smelling of apples again.

Could I ever betray to gossip-mongers

the great vow to the Fourth Estate

and oaths solemn enough for tears?

 

Who else will you kill? Who else will you worship?

What other lie will you dream up?

There’s the Underwood’s cartilage. Hurry, rip out a key,

you’ll find a little bone of a pike.

And in the sick son’s blood the deposit of lime

will melt, and there’ll be sudden blessèd laughter.

But the simple sonatina of typewriters

is only a faint shade of those great sonatas.

 

"
"

Our lives no longer feel ground under them.

At ten paces you can’t hear our words.

 

But whenever there’s a snatch of talk

it turns to the Kremlin mountaineer,

 

the ten thick worms his fingers,

his words like measures of weight,

 

the huge laughing cockroaches on his top lip,

the glitter of his boot-rims.

 

Ringed with a scum of chicken-necked bosses

he toys with the tributes of half-men.

 

One whistles, another meouws, a third snivels.

He pokes out his finger and he alone goes boom.

 

He forges decrees in a line like horseshoes,

One for the groin, one the forehead, temple, eye.

 

He rolls the executions on his tongue like berries.

He wishes he could hug them like big friends from home.

 

"
"

Many months have passed

since the diagnosis,

and you’re still grieving for her.

She’s not dead yet.

But she’s lost, like a child is lost—

her mind the ocean floor,

where she kicks up sand

and churns in the water.

 

Al, we call it, or AD—

never by its real name

as if mentioning the word would bring bad luck—

the need to cross one’s self across the heart,

throw back to the ocean half of one’s catch,

turn three times and pray to the East.

 

Papa’s and her letters,

written during their courtship,

are tied with a faded, red ribbon

and sunk in a safe deposit box at Bishop Trust.

Long ago, she gave them to you

for safekeeping. At the time

 

she exacted a promise from you,

that you would not read them

until she was dead.

We twist down the spiral staircase

curled like a strand of seaweed

into the cold room of vaults,

the heavy thud of door distinct as your sadness

following us everywhere. There,

you turn over the bundle of letters

in your hand like unbelievable money.

“I’m so tempted to read them,” you say.

 

You want her back,

the feisty and independent one,

the one who could, at eighty,

do ten knee bends in aerobics class,

dance a smooth jitterbug

and shuttle like the tide

to and from the house about her business.

Not this Elizabeth you mourn,

the one who can no longer reason,

who points and giggles at fat people

and smells, sometimes, like the ocean.

Time slides like Dali’s clock.

Elizabeth is surprised

that she once was married and had a husband,

that she once gave birth to sons.

 

"
"

In her illness

Elizabeth believes we do this deliberately,

the washing of her body.

She blames me,

her Japanese daughter-in-law

for having made keeping her clean a fetish.

Angry, she says we do this to torment

her soul, the shower a hot

spray of needles we subject

on her moon-colored skin.

She hates it even more

if I’m there to wash her.

She wants her son,

the person she thinks of these days

as her lover, or husband, or father.

Memory and privacy,

she cries at their loss

as I soap her down like an old car.

What protestations!

And as I listen to her,

I think of these bodies

we have given so freely to men,

yet feel ashamed of

when in the eyes of another woman.

How she fawns

when she thinks a man’s around.

Today, she bangs the walls.

“I hate you! The water’s too wet!”

Hanging onto the safety bars,

she pitches back and forth

like a child,

wanting to be let out at the gate.

I wash her back.

She spins around

in my soap-lathered hands,

and loosening her face in mine,

she glares.

She sticks out her tongue,

and biting down on it, she squeals,

jowls swinging, arms jiggling.

Then, in a dive of both hands

between her legs,

she drops to a semi-squat, simian posture

and thrusts her pelvis bones forward

like mountains in an antediluvian upheaval.

In a gesture of obscenity,

she unfolds her petals

and displays her withered sex to me—

the same way boys moon, flip the bird

or grab their crotch and waggle their tongues—

the profane she feels but can’t articulate.

 

"
"

When I was three,

a tsunami hit town.

“Daddy, Daddy, save me,

don’t let me drown.”

He saved me

and my common-type dolls.

 

When I was sixteen,

another tsunami hit town.

I cried to my daddy,

“Daddy, Daddy, please save me,

don’t let me drown!”

But he let go of my hand!

 

I still dance

to what broke on my life.

 

"
"

My son lives on the streets.

We don’t see each other much.

Like a mother who puts white lilies

on the headstone of a dead child,

I put money into his bank account,

clothes into E-Z Access storage

and pretend he’s far away—

at a boarding school, or in a foreign country.

Nights, I dream fairy tales about him.

I dream he becomes a prince,

scholar or warrior who rescues me

from sorrow, the way he rescued me

when he was a child and said,

“Mommy, don’t cry,” and brought tea

into the room of his father’s acrimony—

brave, standing tall in the forest

fire of his father’s scorn. I wake

to the empty sound of wind in the trees.

He says he wants to live with me.

I say I can’t live with him—

boy whose words crash like branches in a rain storm.

Nothing can hold him in,

the walls of a house too thin.

Back home, I had seen

the “study-hard-so-you-don’t-become-like-them”

street bums on Mamo Street,

and he’s like them.

These days, in order to catch a glimpse of him,

I circle the city. One day,

I see him on his bike.

People give him wide berth,

the same way birds avoid power lines,

oncoming cars or trees.

I park on a side street.

Wild-eyed, he flies the block

as if in a holding pattern.

Not of my body, not of my hopes,

he homes in on what can’t be given or taken away.

 

"
"

In college, people were always breaking up.

We broke up in parking lots,

beside fountains.

Two people broke up

across a table from me

at the library.

I could not sit at that table again

though I did not know them.

I studied bees, who were able

to convey messages through dancing

and could find their ways

home to their hives

even if someone put up a blockade of sheets

and boards and wire.

Bees had radar in their wings and brains

that humans could barely understand.

I wrote a paper proclaiming

their brilliance and superiority

and revised it at a small café

featuring wooden hive-shaped honey-dippers

in silver honeypots

at every table.

"
"

From the remains

of his cremation,

the monks recovered

 

the seat of Thich Quang Duc’s

consciousness —

 

a bloodless protest

to awaken the heart

of the oppressor

 

offered

at the crossing of

Phanh Dinh Phung

                                     & Le Van Duyet

doused in gasoline &

immolated by 4-meter

flames the orange-robed

 

arhat folded in

the stillness

of full lotus

 

his body withering

his crown blackening

 

his flesh charring

his corpse collapsing

 

his heart refusing to burn

his heart refusing to burn

his heart refusing to burn

 

"
"

in the shooter’s

face, she recognizes

 

her sibling’s coarse

unforgiving hair,

 

his yellow skin,

& vacant stare,

 

the year her brother

broke down, she was

 

still in high

school, seventeen —

 

w/ a taste for cutting

not class but hands

 

& arms any outlet

to escape

 

this “community”

 

denies illness,

a family reacts —

 

against crying out loudlet it be some other Asian

 

in the shooter’s

face, I recognize

 

my sibling’s coarse

unforgiving hair,

 

his yellow skin,

& vacant stare,

 

the year my brother

broke down, I was

 

still in high

school, seventeen —

 

w/ a taste for cutting

not class but hands

 

& arms any outlet

to escape

 

this “community”

 

denies illness,

a family reacts —

 

against crying out loudlet it be some other Asian

 

"
"

At Pearl Street station,

two brown-skinned men

 

in painter’s pants stand

out in a sea of white

 

I am just one more face

sticking out in a crowd

 

& it is my privilege

 

that prevents me from

understanding why

 

the workers want to know

how to buy one-way trips

 

the automated machine

sells only one roundtrip fee,

 

back to where you came from

 

he isn’t asking me for change

says it clear enough so that

 

there can be no mistakeSí. Yo sé.

 But a dollar fifty is a lot of money.

 

"
"







For James Kim (1971 — 2006)







it could have

happened to any

of us

 

a wrong turn

down a logging road

tires tunneled

into snow

 

a man’s undying

love for his children

 

moves satellites

maps aerial images

 

eighteen care packages

dropped over 16

miles of the Siskiyou,

 

bearing handwritten

notes from a father

to his son

 

the signs

you left for those

who came after you

 

a red t-shirt

a wool sock,

a child’s blue skirt

 

layers of a life,

stripped down to

a family’s fate —

 

the weight of being

unseen — to travel

a path back to

 

what you knew

at birth, the warmth

of being held close

 

brought home

"
"

We spend the afternoon together watching a docudrama about wild horses that roamed the ancient Arctic Circle. Surprisingly sleek, built for speed and not the weather, they were remarkable for their recklessness. They careen headlong down ice bluffs to fall into a broken heap. We can hear the small, tinny sounds of their terror as they plunge across vast, glowing glacial faces. All of this takes place alongside an abstractly relentless gunmetal sea. I can feel you turn to me, wetness marking the corners of your lips and eyes. I, too, am mesmerized, my vision limited to a sense of motion on the peripheries. Later, I am summoned for an impromptu scan and, miraculously, I pass.

"
"

My skin crawls at odd hours of the day, a residual effect of my recent radiation therapies, how they inadvertently synced me to coronal flares. During my morning tea, at the gym, during the drive back home. A simple turn transforms into an avalanching pinprick of tremors one millimeter thick. I’d have preferred a suppurative response—one that collects under the skin—to this invisible, blistering, cracklesome lightning scar. One can’t choose the mood that gathers, the body’s response.


 


The brightest moments of the day rarely correlate to a discharge. Gray sky or blackness, a foggy haze aswirl between stars and nothing halts. Some moments tear my teeth.


 


The news feed portends rolling blackouts across the state. I read over the last of my messages: A blanket request for a plasma donation, Sasha asking if I want a ride to the wake.

"
"

                                 How much chemical disorder

                 can be survived depends                on medical technology.

    A hundred years ago, cardiac arrest was irreversible.

                                       People were called dead

                when their heart                  stopped beating.

            Today death is                                  believed to occur 4

      to 6 minutes after                                      the heart stops beating

              because after                                     several minutes it is difficult

      to resuscitate the brain.

                                                    However, with new experimental

              treatments, more than         10 minutes of warm cardiac

                                      arrest can       now be survived without

      brain injury.     Future technologies

                                                          for molecular repair may extend the

 

 

                               frontiers of resuscitation beyond

                                    60 minutes or more,

                             making today’s             beliefs about

                       when death                             occurs

                                                                        obsolete

 

 

        merely transitory evidence          a stray boundary between

   a much longer-lasting            (invisible                     opposite polarities

         feature                                                             the fields annihilate

                        the field tries to                        one another

                             repel the intruder                        rapidly

 

 

 

                            velocities     directly                    shine in emission

                          visible                                                              shortly

 

 

                                  in terms of                  before

                                                       brightness                              totality

 

 

"
"

I. MORPHO MENELAUS

 

Foiled acqua-

moiré wings the

butterfly’s beauty-

mark hydraulic in its

purposes   his

hair’s flame lifts

you snarls you

 

II. MORPHO ACHILLES

 

Sea-bed in semaphore / an

eyepiece     wing-span

delft dye vat-dipped shingle

scintilla        :        truant

and acclimate     enfold

or infuriate:     SOS:Don’t surroundDon’t surroundyourself with yourself

 

III. MORPHO RHETENOR HELENA

 

Neon heather sky-

lit bluer than moiré:

 

inseam of street

trash     lush mask-

 

contour     soul-

strait fungible

 

as raiment in the

crawlspace     radiating

 

amatory birds’

egg bulls-eye

 

"
"

Something I learned about agape when I was young: the Iliad tells

us fellow-feeling is finite in communities. Brotherly love becomes a

number that has to be divided among persons—so if you’re too kind to

others, that might explain your neighbor’s graft. I sometimes wonder if

perception is the same; if the quantity of percepts, or our trove of eidetic

things, is not limitless but rather constant: the measure, say, of a sunlit

field. So if we dip like deep-sea divers to the world, we’ll have to use a

purse-seine to sieve our sense impressions. We’re hoarding the image

at our peril. That bluest scilla smeared by a finger writing in the grass?

Endangered. Poetry’s work is not to ravish, but diminish.

 

"
"

The coal-dust hushed

parameters of the room.

 

Outside, my mother stitched

whole dresses for $3.00 a piece.

 

I slept in a bedroom

which faced the street.

 

A cheerleader was killed

in a drive-by that year.

 

She died in her sleep.

 

I watched the headlights

sweep overhead.

 

          *

 

It felt like skin.

 

It did not

feel obscene.

 

When that boy

tongue-kissed me

 

and wiped

his mouth,

 

it was a coming

into knowledge.

 

          *

 

When my mother whispered,Has anyone touched you there?

I had to pick.

 Alan, I said.

 

I was seven.

The training wheels

were coming off.

 

Between the couch

and wall, the ceiling was white

with popcorn bits. The boys stood

 

and watched. I lay there,

my eyes open like a doll’s.

Someone said, Let me try.

 

He pulled down his pants

and rode on top,

then abruptly stopped.

 

The boys laughed,

said Shhh

and stood me up.

 

"
"

I see my mother, at thirteen,

in a village so small

it’s never given a name.

 

Monsoon season drying up—

steam lifting in full-bodied waves.

She chops bắp chuối for the hogs.

 

Her hair dips to the small of her back

as if smeared in black

and polished to a shine.

 

She wears a deep side-part

that splits her hair

into two uneven planes.

 

They come to watch her:

Americans, Marines, just boys,

eighteen or nineteen.

 

With scissor-fingers,

they snip the air,

point at their helmets

 

and then at her hair.

All they want is a small lock—

something for a bit of good luck.

 

Days later, my mother

is sent to the city

for safekeeping.

 

She will return home once,

only to be given away

to my father.

 

In the pictures,

the cake is sweet

and round.

 

My mother’s hair

which spans the length

of her áo dài

 

is long, washed, and uncut.

"
"

My father does his own dental work.

A power drill and epoxy

and steady hands—

 

On Christmas Day, he mistook

the Macy’s star

for the Viet Cong flag.

 

While watchingForrest Gump, he told me

how he too carried a friend.

 He squeezedaround my throat so tight,I thought I’d die with him.

 

"
"

She opened her mouth and a moose came out, a donkey, and an ox—out of her mouth, years of animal grief. I lead her to the bed. She held my hand and followed. She said, Chết rồi, and like that, the cord was cut, the thread snapped, and the cable that tied my mother to her mother broke. And now her eyes red as a market fish. And now, she dropped like laundry on the bed.


 


The furniture moved toward her, the kitchen knives and spoons, the vibrating spoons—they dragged the tablecloth, the corner tilting in, her mouth a sinkhole. She wanted all of it: the house and the car too, and the flowers she planted, narcissus and hoa mai, which cracked open each spring—the sky, she brought it low until the air was hot and wet and broke into a rain—


 


the torrents like iron ropes you could climb up, only I couldn’t. I was drowning in it. I was swirled in. I leapt into her mouth, her throat, her gut, and stayed inside with the remnants of my former life. I ate the food she ate and drank the milk she drank. I grew until I crowded the furnishings. I edged out her organs, her swollen heart. I grew up and out so large that I became a woman, wearing my mother’s skin.

"
"

Mid-October in Central Park, one of the elms

has changed early, burning with a light

grown accustomed to its own magnificence,

 

imperceptible until this moment when it becomes

more than itself, more than a ritual

of self-immolation. I think of sacrifice

 

as nourishment, the light feeding bark and veins

and blood and skin, the tree better off

for wanting nothing more. I used to imagine

 

the chakra like this—a hole in the soul

from the top of the head, where the light of knowing

can shimmer through. In the summer of 1979

 

I saw that light shoot from my brother’s forehead

as we sat chanting in a temple in Manila.

He didn’t see it pulsing like a bulb in a storm,

 

but he said he felt the warmth that wasn’t warmth

but peace. And I, who have never been

so privileged, since then have wondered

 

if we believed everything because not to believe

was to be unhappy. I’ve seen that light elsewhere

—on a river in Bangkok, or pixeled across

 

the shattered façades of Prague—but it is here

where I perceive its keenest rarity, where I know

it has passed over all the world, has given shape

 

to cities, cast glamour over the eyes of the skeptic,

so that it comes to me informed with the wonder

of many beings. I can’t begin to say how infinite I feel,

 

as though I were one of many a weightless absence

touches, and out of this a strange transformation:

the soul ringed with changes, as old as a tree,

 

as old as light. I am always learning the same thing:

there is no other way to live than this,

still, and grateful, and full of longing.

 

"
"

The dry basin of the moon must have held

the bones of a race, radiant minerals,

or something devoid of genesis, angel-heavy,

idea-pure. All summer we had waited for it,

 

our faces off-blue in front of the TV screen.

Nothing could be more ordinary—two figures

digging dirt in outer space—while mother repeated

Neil Armstrong’s words, like a prayer

 

electronically conveyed. The dunes were lit

like ancient silk, like clandestine pearl.

In the constant lunar night this luminescence

was all we hoped for. A creature unto itself,

 

it poured into the room like a gradual flood

of lightning, touching every object with the cool burn

of something not quite on fire. If we stepped out

Manila would be blank ether, way station,

 

a breathless abeyance. It didn’t matter,

at that moment, where our lives would lead:

father would disown one brother,

one sister was going to die. Not yet unhappy,

 

we were ready to walk on the moon. Reckless

in our need for the possible, we knew

there was no turning back, our bags already packed,

the future a religion we could believe in.

 

"
"

It takes just two people to bring the world

to ruin. So goes the history of love.

At the end of the day we tally the casualties

of war, victory for the one who gets wounded

 

the least. You say it’s time for a change

but I don’t know to what end, change being

just the skin of some incandescent creature

whose grotesque beauty is what we adore,

 

whom some people call love, whom we

venerate because it consumes us, slim pickings

for its huge soul. My people say, don’t look

or you’ll go blind. You say the end was always

 

just around the bend. I say all we have

is unconditional surrender to the future.

So unreliable is the past that I feel compelled

to leave unmourned the blind, relentless loves

 

that may have scorched into our hearts

the way the saints accepted stigmata. My people say,

look back or lose your way. Or, walk backwards,

if you can. So I found myself on a bus to New York City

 

to lose myself completely. Past Hunters Point

we hit the factory of souls—a thousand tombstones

from which a silk-like canopy of smoke rose to meet

God knows what—a spacious emptiness, the end.

 

I’ve heard the world’s never going to end.

I’ve heard it will go on and on, and we will be

as nebulous as Nebuchadnezzar, our live

not worth a footnote, our grandest schemes

 

no more than feeble whispers, all memory

shifting like the continental plates. In the future,

all science will finally come around; genetic

engineering, I’ve been told, will be all the rage,

 

and we will be a super race in a world

infallibly perfected, where trains run on time,

love never dies, and hope can be purchased

by the pound. It’s called immortalization

 of the cell lines. We will choose what will survive.

Our destiny made lucid, we will find the world

contemplating itself, like the young Narcissus,

one hand about to touch the pool, his body

 

lurched towards that marvelous reflection.

I suppose we’ve always felt compelled

to desensitize our failures. My people say,

to go unnoticed, you play dead. I myself

 

may have chosen to forget a face, a name,

some cruel word uttered carelessly, but not,

after all the harm is done, intending any pain.

And many others may have chosen to forget me.

 

It works both ways. My people say, nasa huliang pagsisi: regret is the final emotion.

It’s what you see when you look back.

It’s what’s no longer there.

"
"

You are running away from everyone

who loves you,

from your family,

from old lovers, from friends.

 

They run after you with accumulations

of a former life, copper earrings,

plates of noodles, banners

of many lost revolutions.

 

You love to say the trees are naked now

because it never happens

in your country. This is a mystery

from which you will never

 

recover. And yes, the trees are naked now,

everything that still breathes in them

lies silent and stark

and waiting. You love October most

 

of all, how there is no word

for so much splendor.

This, too, is a source

of consolation. Between you and memory

 

everything is water. Names of the dead,

or saints, or history.

There is a realm in which

—no, forget it,

 

it’s still too early to make anyone understand.

A man drives a stake

through his own heart

and afterwards the opposite of nostalgia

 

begins to make sense: he stops raking the leaves

and the leaves take over

and again he has learned

to let go.

 

"
"

If there is a god, let it be the hyena

who plunges her mouth into the river after eating

our grandfather’s poisoned bait, who,

dark with thirst, poisons the river

unbeknownst to both of them.

 

Her ghosts stand in the street where we are called

already through “time” out of our houses. She tells

her stories. We tell her ours. We all clean our teeth

with what is sharp. She asks, Will you add this story to your stories of history & land & peace?

Yes, we will add this story. We ask her,Will you add these poems to your repertoire of songsabout hunger & thirst & fur? & she, being wiser than we,

says, Yes, I will sing them ifyou grant me your permissionto turn them into poems abouta mercy.

 

"
"

Please raise your hand,

whomever else of you

has been a child,

lost, in a market

or a mall, without

knowing it at first, following

a stranger, accidentally

thinking he is yours,

your family or parent, even

grabbing for his hands,

even calling the word

you said then for “Father,”

only to see the face

look strangely down, utterly

foreign, utterly not the one

who loves you, you

who are a bird suddenly

stunned by the glass partitions

of rooms.

                                        How far

the world you knew, & tall,

& filled, finally, with strangers.

 

"
"







          after Neil deGrasse Tyson, black astrophysicist & director of the Hayden


          Planetarium, born in 1958, New York City. In his youth, deGrasse Tyson was


          confronted by police on more than one occasion when he was on his way to


          study stars.

“I’ve known that I’ve wanted to do astrophysics since I was nine years old, a first visit to the Hayden Planetarium...So I got to see how the world around me reacted to my expression of these ambitions. & all I can say is, the fact that I wanted to be a scientist, an astrophysicist, was, hands down, the path of most resistance...Anytime I expressed this interest teachers would say, Don’t you want to be an athlete? Or, Don’t you wanna...I wanted to become something that was outside of the paradigms of expectation of the people in power.

And I look behind me and say, Well, where are the others who might have been this? And they’re not there. And I wonder, What is the [thing] along the tracks that I happened to survive and others did not? Simply because of the forces that prevented it. At every turn. At every turn.”


                                                 —NdT, The Center for Inquiry, 2007

 

                    Body of space. Body of dark.


                    Body of light.







The Skyview apartments

                    circa 1973, a boy is

kneeling on the rooftop, a boy who

                     (it is important

to mention here his skin

                    is brown) prepares his telescope,

the weights & rods,

                    to better see the moon. His neighbor

(it is important to mention here

                    that she is white) calls the police

because she suspects the brown boy

                    of something, she does not know

what at first, then turns,                    with her looking,

his telescope into a gun,

                    his duffel into a bag of objects

thieved from the neighbors’ houses

                     (maybe even hers) & the police

(it is important to mention

                    that statistically they

are also white) arrive to find

                    the boy who has been turned, by now,

into “the suspect,” on the roof

                    with a long, black lens, which is,

in the neighbor’s mind, a weapon &

                    depending on who you are, reading this,

you know that the boy is in grave danger,

                    & you might have known

somewhere quiet in your gut,

                    you might have worried for him

in the white space between lines 5 & 6,                    or maybe even earlier, & you might be holding

your breath for him right now

                    because you know this story,

it’s a true story, though,

                    miraculously, in this version

of the story, anyway,

                    the boy on the roof of the Skyview lives

to tell the police that he is studying

                    the night & moon & lives

long enough to offer them (the cops) a view

                    through his telescope’s long, black eye, which,

if I am spelling it out anyway,

                    is the instrument he borrowed

& the beautiful “trouble” he went through

                    lugging it up to the roof

to better see the leopard body of

                    space speckled with stars & the moon far off,

much farther than (since I am spelling The Thing

                    out) the distance between

the white neighbor who cannot see the boy

                    who is her neighbor, who,

in fact, is much nearer

                    to her than to the moon, the boy who

wants to understand the large

                    & gloriously un-human mysteries of

the galaxy, the boy who, despite “America,”

                    has not been killed by the murderous jury of

his neighbor’s imagination & wound. This poem                    wants only the moon in its hair & the boy on the roof.

This boy on the roof of this poem

                    with a moon in his heart. Inside my own body

as I write this poem my body

                    is making a boy even as the radio

calls out the Missouri coroner’s news,

                    the Ohio coroner’s news.

2015. My boy will nod

                    for his milk & close his mouth around

the black eye of my nipple.

                    We will survive. How did it happen?

The boy. The cops. My body in this poem.

                    My milk pulling down into droplets of light

as the baby drinks & drinks them down

                    into the body that is his own, see it,

splayed & sighing as a star in my arms.                    Maybe he will be the boy who studies stars.

Maybe he will be (say it)

                    the boy on the coroner’s table

splayed & spangled

                    by an officer’s lead as if he, too, weren’t made

of a trillion glorious cells & sentences. Trying to last.

 

 

Leadless, remember? The body’s beginning,

splendored with breaths, turned,

by time, into, at least, this song.

 

This moment-made & the mackerel-“soul”

caught flashing inside the brief moment of the body’s net,

then, whoosh, back into the sea of space.

 

The poem dreams of bodies always leadless, bearing

only things ordinary

as water & light.

"
"

I adore you: you’re a harrowing event.

I like you very ugly, condensed to one

deep green pang. You cannot ask the simplest

question, your hold is all clutch and sinker.

                                                  Cannibal old me,

with my heart up my throat, blasting on all sides

with my hundred red states. Hidden little striver.

How not to know it, the waist-deep trance of you,

the cursing, coursing say of you. Embarrassing today.

                                                  Curiouser and curiouser,

your body is a mouth, is a night of travel, your body

is tripling the sideways insouciance. The muscle

in you knows gorgeous, in you knows tornadoes.

In an instant’s compass, your blood flees you like a cry.

                                                  You put on my heat,

(that’s the way you work) I’m a bandit gripping

hard on the steal. The substitutions come swiftly,

hungering down the valley, no one question to cover

all of living. I arrange myself in the order of my use.

                                                  You’re wrong and right

at the same time, a breathless deluxe and a devouring

chopping down the back door. You slap my attention

all over the dark. What’s in me like a chime?

Sometimes, sometimes, I come to you for the surprise.

 

"
"

Taking on an aspect of the Orient,

Skies full of hatchets and oranges

Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood:

But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor?

 

Skies full of hatchets and oranges

Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—

But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor,

As the nights grow steadily into mountains.

 

Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—

The princess braids these into a necklace

As the nights grow steadily into mountains,

Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly.

 

The princess braids these into a necklace:

Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace.

Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly

In a solitude full of wars and songs.

 

Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace

Never converge in that vast landscape;

In a solitude full of wars and songs,

The words remain light and fugitive.

 

Never converge in that vast landscape

In the way that stars keep their distance.

The words remain light and fugitive

In an anticipation crossed with absence.

In the way that stars keep their distance,

Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood

In an anticipation crossed with absence,

Taking on an aspect of the Orient.

"
"

We stopped to watch the accident.

Fire! It had finally come to pass.

Just as surely as I was a coward

carrying a wolf. It stepped out from me,

it was paradise leaving me, running towards

the giant idea of that melting house.

So often you don’t think,

“Little nicks of monstrosity, I shall be splendid in it.”

 

"
"

Be large with those small fears. The whole sky

has fallen on you and all you can do about it is

shout, dragging your fear-ettes by their pinked ears.

 

They dance a number now: consequence without

sequence. Lovingly broadminded in their

realization and ruin, expert at the parting shot.

 

Not so small after all, we micro to

macro, swelling to the horror shows

lifted from the sly ways of life.

 

You, both scorched and shining in the terror

of the equivocal moment, its box of cheeky

logics rattling cold certainties out of bounds

 

and into the plaits of a girl’s desirous ends.

A little debauched, the flirt in a freckling,

wondering spun to falling comes to this

 

pert contract of a paradox: saying things

because they will do no good, ringing change

in frumpy mono-determination, fruity and fruitless.

 

Exploded out of shelter, the tides come roaring in.

Let in the hoarse Cassandras and the dull pain of the

storyteller. You’ve needed those eyes all along.

 

We thought them disconcerting at first,

but it’s the only way. You live here now

having exchanged etiquette for energy.

 

Don’t be clever, don’t be shy! Participate today.

Yesterday you say everything for their own sake,

and soon enough, tomorrow, you learn a lot from them.

 

"
"

On the morning of the 20th National Day

my uncle came home and told us:

“All our troops have got into position,

for the Russians may throw an atom-bomb on us today.”

 

After breakfast he returned to the headquarters,

but I had to go to school and join the celebration.

 

The fear oppressed my back like a bag of sand.

I could not raise the little triangle flag in my hand,

nor could I shout slogans with my classmates.

 

During the break I called together my best friends

and told them what would occur on this day.

Benli said, “I must go home

and tell my dad to kill all our chickens.”

Qingping said, “I must tell my aunt

not to buy a sewing machine.

Who would care about clothes if that happens.”

Yimin and I said nothing,

but we knew what we were going to do.

 

We decided to go to the army,

for we did not want to be roasted at home

like little pigs.

 

"
"

The sound of a guitar drifts through the air.

Cupped in my hand, a snowflake quivers lightly.

Thick patches of fog draw back to reveal

A mountain range, rolling like a melody.

I have gathered the inheritance of the four seasons.

There is no sign of man in the valley.

Picked wild flowers continue to grow,

Their flowering is their time of death.

Along the path in the primordial wood

Green sunlight flows through the slits.

A russet hawk interprets into bird cries

The mountain's tale of terror.

Abruptly I cry out,

""Hello, Bai—hua—Mountain.""

""Hello, my—child,"" comes the echo

From a distant waterfall.

It was a wind within a wind, drawing

A restless response from the land,

I whispered, and the snowflake

Drifted from my hand down the abyss.

"
"







for Yu Luoke







Perhaps the final hour is come

I have left no testament

Only a pen, for my mother

I am no hero

In an age without heroes

I just want to be a man

The still horizon

Divides the ranks of the living and the dead

I can only choose the sky

I will not kneel on the ground

Allowing the executioners to look tall

The better to obstruct the wind of freedom

From star-like bullet holes shall flow

A blood-red dawn

"
"

in the end, cold crows piece together

the night: a black map

I've come home—the way back

longer than the wrong road

long as a life

bring the heart of winter

when spring water and horse pills

become the words of night

when memory barks

a rainbow haunts the black market

my father's life-spark small as a pea

I am his echo

turning the corner of encounters

a former lover hides in a wind

swirling with letters

Beijing, let me

toast your lamplights

let my white hair lead

the way through the black map

as though a storm were taking you to fly

I wait in line until the small window

shuts: O the bright moon

I go home—reunions

are one less

fewer than goodbyes

"
"

The best thing of all is to take the enemy’s country whole and intact.

My mother took my heart out. She banked it on top of her stove.

It glowed white. She put it back in my chest.

 

Tita knew that overseas workers often had affairs.

He licked me and I pretended it pinged through my body like a swift idea

That I wrote about and considered like a bell of good craftsmanship.

He also knew that their kids ate better

 

He said your belly is like a cat’s.

He said with his bowl up to his chin

More please.

 

At night the fireflies come out. They flock to my window.

I put my hands up against the screen.

I think how fragile it is to be inside a house.

They say I want permission

 

I paint my face. I say—just take it.

Easy. If equally matched, we can offer battle.

If unequal in any way, we can flee from him.

 

Deprived of their father while sustained by his wages.

I thought a lot about walking around at night.

By myself. Just to think. But I never did.

I thought I could just flick a switch.

 

When I was born, my mother and father gave me a gardenia like personal star.

Don’t you hate it when someone apologizes all the time?

It’s like they are not even sorry.

 

"
"

She brightens at the evidence. Like a strong appliance.

 

You can make it hot.

 

Grown ass people having tantrums.

 

I’m unbought, unheated. Like a perfectly square morsel of lasagna.

 

A wrathful rubics cube.

 

To realize, I wish to ridicule people interested in martial arts.

 

That I’m not getting better.

 

 

 

My uncle would prank call my father, “Immigration!”

 

He’d crow. And my father would fall to silence.

 

No matter the heavy accent.

 

No matter the voice he’d known unto boredom.

 

One wing swigging out to its brother on the other bird.

 

I measured this silence when I was a girl.

 

The quality of the joke and how it rested

 

on the bad stomach of a tensile citizenry.

 

The joke was that, in an instant,

 We Lost Everything.

 

 

 

It is important to remember who would laugh first—

 

the perpetrator/uncle/jokester or the assailed/father/feather.

 

Or maybe, it isn’t.

 

Maybe what you should know is that

 

they told this joke over and over and ever.

 

My uncle crowed. My father disbelieved. We lost everything.

 

And then, the svelte, sweet brier laughter.

 

"
"







The art of war teaches us to rely not on the chance of the enemy not attacking but rather on the fact that we have made our position unassailable.

          —Sun Tzu







My father called me a chink

so I’d know how to receive it.

So I wouldn’t be surprised.

 Therefore the good soldier will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.

 

In the wall, I bricked up my secret.

So it would gush forth. I did this for effect.

So you would know me.

 On the day of battle your soldiers might weep bedewing their garments.

 

But it grew like a bullet loving its flowerstain.

It happened nonetheless.

 But let them at once be brought to bay.

 

Because you are simply my medic watching me.

I’m a poem someone else wrote for me.

All of the characters “beautiful and flawed.”

 When we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are far.

 

My sister said, you can forget our way of life?

I said yes and was annoyed. She ran away and I was desperate for her.

I was screaming into the mindspeaker.

 When far away, we must make him believe we are near.

 

I said, Christine, christine, christine.

 

"
"

All birds—even those that do not fly

—have wings

 

A constant confession

Admission of omission

 

This is your punctuated equilibrium

And everything in between

Slow it down

 

The moment of extinction

The death of the last individual of a species

(Let’s put it aside for now)

Stay with it

 

This is our gene flow

How do you like our genetic drift

A riff, a rift, a raft…

Too rough for the second half

 

Take us under, take us downhill

Paint pangenesis all over your dancing body

The new party god

Keep the beat going, don’t stop, you can’t stop

 

Crick & Watson

Evo-devo

This is your mother’s local phenomenon

 

If this is racial hygiene

Why do I feel so dirty?

 

Microcosmic soul

It’s an involutionary wonderland

This living matter

A modern synthesis

4.6 billion years of biology

Can’t stop the ideology

Graduate from meet/mate

To fitness landscape of sexual selection

 

From land over sea

It’s a hard lyric

The impression of a key in a bar of soap

A transitional fossil

 

Keep camping

Plant the flag

Bury the burial mound

Put the pop in popular

And the sigh in science

 

"
"

Some(where a) woman wears

 

the face once given. Possessions

 

scarce we go halves on slant

 

of eye & span of palm with cousin & other

 

ghosts. Where is the man with the face lent

 

mother? Fathers rare; infant found

 at Shinkyo police station box—official

 

shoes careened around fortune of Name

 & birth, pin &

 note. Elsewhere (Norway, Australia)

 

another Korean

 

National bears the imprint

 

of my din. Cribs, nurse, hands, rice-milk powder, down

 

& rocked—carefully dated

 

checks. American/Father

 

asks Why. We don’t speak. Years

 

burn to decades, this permanent

 

occupation.

 

"
"

This is you—Titanus giganteus, your maw snapping pencils in half and cutting through human flesh. My encyclopedia chokes on your bulk. My camera, timid, afraid to look, as if you’re naked—not one adult male, but millions.


 


Few garments sound as fine as flak jacket, the best of the tagmata the thorax, more prime than brains as the body can keep mating, cracking its margins. Your shield like a wing, protects your bulletproof heart from the wind, your right arm black in the cloth of your brothers. Full face visor. Baby gladiator.


 


Beyond the screen, memorized—jawbone like a scandal reflecting all the thieves and beggars. Insect lord, insect mind. This is my fear. You look like my brother, my son. You could kill me with your looks.

"
"

Like a wedding ring, or the bride’s green ribbon, you shelter me.

No business but war. You remind me of a kind of heaven.

 

A cairn of rocks casting shadows in the shape of a man.

 

Thou art the table before me in the sight of my adversaries, thou dost

anoint my head: oil and rain, thou art a ghost with a girl’s mouth,

thou art not the making of my dreams—under water, under cliff,

under this long suitcase of earth and bombs. More than any mortal

could gather beneath the skirt of the sky.

 

You are never eager, nor famished, nor pale with a craving for white

clothes or my nocturnes.

 

Let your lynx approach, even tiger, even its wild outline.

 

You need no ferryman or the obolus of the dead.

If I put a coin in my mouth I taste copper, not the corpse.

They say that bodies fertilized the ground so well the trees grow

bright and tall. The bones blur. We return alive.

 

"
"

Because of time being an arrow, I had to imagine everything.


 


I had to fold the song with my mind because of the time being. Wash the rice here, in the present.


 


Because of the arrow I pent up the fourth wall as though I were diapering my own newborn.


 


I put time to the breast, though I feared it was not an arrow but an asp.


 


Being time I kept that fear under my tongue like a thermometer. I felt its mercury rolling under my teeth, boiling like language.


 


A deaf man, an old man, I am his hand, rough and gentle, an arrow here and then.


 


Time, I can see what I feel.


 


In the future even your future becomes my past. Arrow, I have died. There is peace. I pull it from me like a blanket.


 


As in a dream, because of time being an arrow, I put on the dress of a young, lovely mother. Because of her, because of the time, here I am, always watching over you.


 

"
"

No more hangings, no more gas chambers. No one allowed to remain in the center of the labyrinth, guarding their dna from the world, from the future. No more contemplation, no more waste. Everyone leaning toward paradise. Shields down and the word enemy will pass from memory. You are my kind.

"
"

The last time he cut his mother’s hair

     the rude morning sun

left no corner of her kitchen private,

     the light surgically clean

where it fell on his scissors.

     Her hair fell in a blonde circle

on the lake blue tile—smell of coffee

     and cinnamon; her laughing

shook her head, Hold still, he said,

     his hands surfeit with the curl

and softness of her hair.

 

     Three weeks after her death,

a stranger entered the salon

     and settled in the chair.

She had the color and shape

     of his mother’s hair,

and when he sunk his hands in it,

     the texture, even cowlicks,

individual as freckles—same.

     Twice he had to leave the room,

and twice, he returned—still,

     when he touched her hair, it blurred.Hold still, he said, hold still.

 

"
"

Nevermind that keeping ashes

     on the mantel feels ghoulish,

and comically impractical:

 

not just another thing,

     a miniature memento urn, to dust,

but dust to dust—

 

I dread the conversational

     Hara-kiri, not, that’s what’s leftof my brother, but, he died of suicide:

 

the chasm of silence following the leap—

     so the cremains stay

in the office closet till they migrate

 

through no will of their own

     to a moving box

I haven’t unpacked and likely won’t.

"
"

One among the shifting mass

   of humanity intent

on countless destinations,

   one hungry stomach

 

and dry mouth among many,

   one brain dazed

by the speed and altitude

   of flights unnatural

 

to any animal, by herding,

   followed by waiting

succeeded by rushing,

   waiting, herding—

 

and more flight

   incomprehensible

to any body contained

   in this seemingly unwieldy

 

mass of metal lifting

   improbably over Chicago,

where a misty orange aura

   hovers over the city’s

 

brighter lights, as if

   its soul sought ascension

it could only attempt,

   as if the aura

 

might break free

   and follow us,

wherever we might fly,

   wheresoever we may rest—

 

one with the multitude

   of humans en route

through mystery,

   to mystery.

 

"
"

I wanted to give you something for your pain.

But not the drug du jour

or the kind word this side of cliché.

Something you wouldn’t find on a talk show,

in a department store or dark alleyway.

I wanted to give you something for your pain

 

but I couldn’t imagine what.

Frankincense, myrrh—even gold

seemed too plain (too plain and too gross).

I needed something that wouldn’t have occurred

to you or me, or even Nature: a creature

more fabulous, more imaginary

 

than you’d find in a rain forest or tapestry

or pixel-loaded screen. Some exotic anodyne

an alchemist or astrophysicist

would be envious of: a chemical reaction,

an astral refraction, an out-of-body,

out-of-mind, one-of-a-kind

 

transport from your pain, that would last

longer than a day, go deeper than the past.

I would have founded a whole new religion

if I thought that would suffice.

As for love—sacred, profane, or both—

I wanted to give you something

 

that didn’t arrive with a roll of the dice

and was hard to maintain and had a knack

for disappointing. I wanted to give you

something for your pain that didn’t smack

of a sorcerer’s trick, or a poet’s swoon,

or a psychiatrist’s quip. Nothing too heavy

 

or spacey or glib. I’d have given you the moon

but it’s been done (and besides, its desolate dust

and relentless tendency to wane

might have only exacerbated your pain).

If I could have given you something

you could depend on, could always trust

 

without a second thought, I would have.

A splendid view, perhaps, or a strain

of music. A favorite dish. A familiar tree.

A visit from a genie who, in lieu of granting you

a wish, would tend subtly to your every need,

and never once tire, never complain.

 

But when all was said and done

(or hardly said, not nearly done)

I was as helpless as you. Could you tell—

or were you so overcome your pain was all

that mattered? It seemed to me we were a kind

of kin: willing the mind its bold suspensions,

 

but the heart, once shattered, never quite matching

its old dimensions. And yet you persevered

in spite of pain, you knew to hold hope

as lightly as you held my hand (a phantom grasp,

a clasp that seemed to come from the other side).

And your genial smile made it plain: you were pleased

by my wish to please. And then you died.

"
"







after Hokusai and Hiroshige







I dreamt half my life was spent

in wonder, and never suspected.

 

So immersed in the moment

I forgot I was ever there.

 

Red-tailed hawk turning

resistance into ecstasy.

 

The patrolmen joking with the drunk

whose butt seemed glued to the sidewalk.

 

A coral quince blossom in winter,

pink as a lover’s present.

 

And tilting my bamboo umbrella

against the warm slant

 

of rain, was I not a happy peasant

crossing the great bay on a bridge that began

 

who knows when, and will end

who knows when?

"
"

One spring night, at the end of my street

God was lying in wait.

 

A friend and I were sitting in his new sedan

like a couple of cops on surveillance,

shooting the breeze to pass the time,

chatting up the daydreams, the raw deals,

all the wouda-coulda-shoulda’s,

the latest “Can you believe that?”

As well as the little strokes of luck,

the so-called triumphs, small and unforeseen,

that kept us from cashing it all in.

 

And God, who’s famous for working

in mysterious ways and capable of anything,

took the form of a woman and a man,

each dressed in dark clothes and desperate enough

to walk up to the car and open the doors.

 

And God put a gun to the head of my friend—

right against the brain stem, where the orders go out

not only to the heart and the lungs

but to consciousness itself—a cold muzzle aimed

at where the oldest urges still have their day:

the one that says eat whatever’s at hand,

the one that wants only to fuck,

the one that will kill if it has to…

 

And God said not to look at him

or he’d blow us straight to kingdom come,

and God told us to keep our hands

to ourselves, as if she weren’t that kind of girl.

 

Suddenly time was nothing,

our lives were cheap, the light in the car

cold, light from a hospital,

light from a morgue. And the moments

that followed—if that’s what they were—

arrived with a nearly unbearable weight,

until we had acquired

a center of gravity

as great as the planet itself.

 

My friend could hardly speak—

he was too busy trying not to die—

which made me chatter all the more,

as if words, even the most ordinary ones,

had the power to return us to our lives.

 

And behind my ad-libbed incantation,

my counterspell to fear, the orders

still went out: keep beating, keep breathing,

you are not permitted to disappear,

 

even as one half of God kept bitching

to the other half that we didn’t have

hardly no money at all, and the other half barked,

“I’m telling you to shut your mouth!”

and went on rummaging through the back seat.

And no one at all looking out their window,

no one coming home or going out…

 

Until two tall neighbors came walking toward us

like unsuspecting saviors…  And God grabbed

the little we’d been given, the little we still had,

and hustled on to the next dark street.

"
"







—St. John of the Cross







And it won’t be multiple choice,

though some of us would prefer it that way.

Neither will it be essay, which tempts us to run on

when we should be sticking to the point, if not together.

In the evening there shall be implications

our fear will change to complications. No cheating,

we’ll be told, and we’ll try to figure the cost of being true

to ourselves. In the evening when the sky has turned

that certain blue, blue of exam books, blue of no more

daily evasions, we shall climb the hill as the light empties

and park our tired bodies on a bench above the city

and try to fill in the blanks. And we won’t be tested

like defendants on trial, cross-examined

till one of us breaks down, guilty as charged. No,

in the evening, after the day has refused to testify,

we shall be examined on love like students

who don’t even recall signing up for the course

and now must take their orals, forced to speak for once

from the heart and not off the top of their heads.

And when the evening is over and it’s late,

the student body asleep, even the great teachers

retired for the night, we shall stay up

and run back over the questions, each in our own way:

what’s true, what’s false, what unknown quantity

will balance the equation, what it would mean years from now

to look back and know

we did not fail.

"
"

The pleasure of walking a long time on the mountain

without seeing a human being, much less speaking to one.

 

And the pleasure of speaking when one is suddenly there.

The upgrade from wary to tolerant to convivial,

so unlike two brisk bodies on a busy street

for whom a sudden magnetic attraction

is a mistake, awkwardness, something to be sorry for.

 

But to loiter, however briefly, in a clearing

where two paths intersect in the matrix of chance.

To stop here speaking the few words that come to mind.

A greeting. Some earnest talk of weather.

A little history of the day.

 

To stand there then and say nothing.

To slowly look around past each other.

Notice the green tang pines exude in the heat

and the denser sweat of human effort.

 

To have nothing left to say

but not wanting just yet to move on.

The tension between you, a gossamer thread.

It trembles in the breeze, holding

the thin light it transmits.

 

To be held in that

line of force, however briefly,

as if it were all that mattered.

 

And then to move on.

With equal energy, with equal pleasure.

 

"
"







for TNH







There are those who will never return to us

as we knew them. Who if they return at all

visit our sleep, or daydreams, or turn up in the features

of total strangers. Or greet us face to face

in the middle of some rush hour street,

but from a great distance—and not in the full flush

of bodies that once wanted nothing more from us

than the laying of our hands upon them,

as a healer lays hands upon the afflicted.

There are those who by their absence are an affliction.

 

I imagine that sometimes in your dark bed

you still want to know why. Why the man

you were just coming to love, who liked you close

as he raced through the city at night, why

he had to swerve suddenly. Why he had to end up

on an operating table, dead. Why you of all people

had to live, to repeat this unanswerable question.

 

I could tell you about a woman good at ritual

who, hardly believing in herself, was good

at making vows the two of us could believe.

Then one day I had to drive her to an early flight.

The dawn was blinding. She was off to look for the soul

no one else could provide. But was this the way

to do it? She didn’t know. She wanted me

to tell her. Tears down her face. And I kept driving.

I can look back and say: on that day, that’s when I died.

 

Since then, you and I have had a hard time believing

anything could bring us back. And yet your brown body

breathes new life into a cotton print from the fifties,

and picks parsley from the garden for spaghetti carbonara,

 

and cues up Mozart’s French horn solo, and fills up the kitchen

with the aroma of sourdough, and gets my body to anticipate

the taste of malt as the tops of American beer cans pop:

good rituals all, because they waited out our every loss, patient

with the slow coming back to our senses, undeterred by our neglect.

As if they knew all along how much we would need them.

 

"
"

Whitman thought he could live with animals, they were

so placid and self-contained, not one of them dissatisfied.

I have lived with animals. They kept me up all night.

Not only tom cats on the prowl, and neurotic rats

behind my baseboards, scratching out a slim existence.

There were cattle next door in the butcher’s pen,

great longhorns lowing in the dark. Their numbers had come up

and they knew it. I let their rough tongues lick my sorry palm.

Nothing else I could do for them, or they for me.

 

Walt can live with the animals. I’ll take these vegetables on parade:

string-beans and cabbage heads and pea brains, who negotiate

a busy crosswalk and feel brilliant, the smallest act accomplished

no mean feat, each one guiding them to other small acts

that will add up, in time, to something like steady purpose.

They cling to this fate, clutch it along with their brownbag lunches:

none of us would choose it, but this is their portion, this moment,

then this one, then the next. Little as it is, pitiful as it seems,

this is what they were given, and they don’t want to lose it.

 

The gawky and the slow, the motley and the misshapen…

What bliss to be walking in their midst as if I were one of them,

just ride this gentle wave of idiocy, forget those who profess

an interest in my welfare, look passing strangers in the eye

for something we might have in common, and be unconcerned if nothing’s there.

And now we peek into a dark café, and now we mug at the waitress

whose feet are sore, whose smile makes up for the tacky carnations

and white uniform makes it easy to mistake her for a nurse,

even makes it necessary, given the state of the world.

 

And when the giant with three teeth harangues us to hurry up,

what comfort to know he’s a friend, what pleasure to be agreeable,

small wonders of acquiescence, like obedient pets. Except animals

don’t have our comic hope, witless as it is. They don’t get

to wave madly at the waitress, as though conducting a symphony

of ecstatic expectations. If I turned and lived with animals

I’d only be a creature of habit, I’d go to where the food is

and the warmth. But I wouldn’t get to say to my troubled friend,

“Your eyes are so beautiful. I could live in them.”

 

"
"

Inside me lived a small donkey. I didn’t

believe in magic, but the donkey

was a sucker for the stuff. Psychics,

illusionists, arthritics who’d predict

the rainfall. That was the year I had trouble

walking. I over-thought it and couldn’t

get the rhythm right. The donkey re-taught me.

“This foot. Yes, then that one. And swing

your arms as if you’re going to trial

to be exonerated of a crime

you’ve most definitely committed.”

Next, trouble sleeping because

I’d need to crank the generator in my chest

so frequently. Seeing I was overworked,

the donkey finally hauled it out—

it looked shiny and new, a silver dollar—

and tossed it into a flock of birds

who had to fly a long way to find safety.

I knew then I was a large and dangerous man,

what with this donkey living inside me,

but felt futile. One day, during

a final lesson on breathing,

the donkey asked what kind of jeans

I was wearing. I said, “The somber ones.”

“Poor kid.” “So will you be staying on

for a third year, donkey?” “No. I think

I should be leaving soon. I think

I should go and await your arrival beside

the crumpled river.” “Yes, I suppose

you have many important matters to attend to,

but maybe one day I will come and join you

for a drink or, perhaps, for a brief nap.”

"
"

       pulse light

 

 

starts there starts           getting smaller     All that you can’t remember,

Claire says.  ,   With two glass eyes           I’m wobbling down

  a walkway          inflecting aloha                                        no thumbtacks,

          attached     no pins,           To feel.          Good by.

among crimson and silver turnstiles,     all the folks          In orange,

               Silvery hats and thermal     The madmen mad getting

madder     daisies all done          Again          me strolling, me fuming,

slipping,   the stream frozen. the matter of face. the quasars

 

     huffing on.           In December   no summery mask,     No, just

the shimmering scene, the firmament.     a blackbird indicating, nods

           Maybe a change    dust of a brick  maybe

I remember,      I recall.      a cyclotron.          An ingenuous ramrod

     The flay of her hair               fall sinking          Rowboat

turning to winter,     rowboat, rowboat      Chatter of the breakage

 

iii.                              verb forms of a neutron bomb

 

starts sloe gin     over time                    Fermenting in the firmament

     red shifting with Claire     waking with Claire, betweening

and vaguing Claire          the embassies exchanging airs.          lily white,

     glittery photons          , spark                         at the bottom working

iamb          iamb iamb                    iamb                                        iamb

Claire    don’t care                    reminiscing          Tuscaloosa

in.           A corner of the soiree.                              , standing so bluntly

     you resemble no one,          Precisely, as if receding          over a hill,

 

you resembles everyone. corralling       , the bulky idea of the hill into.

              an encampment,                                                  a tiny cranium.

     And it’s                    as if,          Spying you                              through

          a whiskey on rocks.                    a mass hysteria

I struttle along,      Making          commonplace.          Ubnutterances,

     and guts                                        your house is blue with two glass eyes

 

 

iii.                              quantum entanglement

 

starts with a single shot.          fired                not the year of my     fathers.

          slow, death starts.     year my mother goes     terminal,

The vacuous scene          chattering,                         Like an elephant

      collapsing     the animals fuming,                              weird winged bugs

     The serious business of.    squishing them, they simply regroup.

And reappear.    , Claire.          I’m stumbling down the thoroughfare.

in a dark,  Pinching what few glittering photons,          I’m trolling.

murky and building up.     start at the bottom,                    working a way

 

Upwards     Evening,       like a tumbler.                    folding.  itself over

          Feeling contented all around.  squinting,          started clawing

with two glass eyes          feeling for thumbtacks.                    Among

the broad vagaries.                         among the wild visions,          Claire.

. I say I know you better,                            , than.   You could imagine,

     or some other,          but you sock me.          Hard. In the gut instead.

 

 

i.                              aimed by magnets

 

 

               starts redundant          Futile with a screwdriver, among the wrecks.

,  I am having a ball comma       Describe the house        comma paint

the doorjamb end-stop               these months     spent   a-chatter.

                the sidewalk spinal column                              of a mule that carries me.

Through the broad making-world.            one universe over,

We are inseparable.      And own many cats     the city.                             Large.

   like  viewing an egg,                        From the egg’s interior.

I go about the serious business   strolling,                                    The firmament

 

Claire.   your pocket watch,          A frayed yellow.                                    T-shirt.

on the narrative fringe.  of the narrative,                  the weightless photons

say       Holding hands                              One universe over. You do not forgive

   me.            ,  all that I can’t                              but Maybe a small change

maybe something less     than the sky,

             maybe something.                              More than the sky could conjure.

 

ii.                                    if this were a sonnet, I

 

                     start with all that you can’t remember.                  The gutters

Overloaded.      the funky trinkets,           Weird winged bugs

  on the sill.                  In the air,      When I go about the     business

, strolling home    Claire.                        riding the slipstream

sloe gin.            All drink and whiskey.      the old ferry, a rowboat

,            in my gut.                        smooth as a mirror          Every mad

Artifact     everyone I’ve ever met,                       resembling

Claire dissembling          My wintered axe.            start at the bottom

 

Work your way upwards.            like a signature saying I’ve been here,

      strolling past,            these fumes,                             on the air

smell like a letter.            All thermal               , all water     Quasars

   bleating,      blackbird saying,      The search light pauses     Pluck

The wings out one at a time.      Chicago and     blackbird, blackbird,

I unaware.    of ours, the               recombinant bodies of the gods.

    

 

i.                              focused by a lens

 

starts with the scene     starts.               December,          Smooth

as a mirror     Hard in the gut                         feels like a tumbler.

          Claire, inflecting               good, by.     walking.

Claire.          the scene of sparks.     among the while, the fission

   The house is blue.     with two glass eyes     among the firmament

 

no pins to pin you   No, thumbtacks to hold you          But photons and

          all the things that you can’t       .        Among the sloe gin,

your frayed yellow T-shirt. I returned          to you, but you wanting

 

In a corner of the soiree.  a corner of the prairie,     more than the sky

     This is where the elephant toppled.     when what you remember is

Collided, with               Often     under the webbed foot

               Of my imagining, you     are the entire throng.          Wearing

   your face,     Dust of a brick,     what’s left is               What when

the particle accelerator               paints its          disastered portrait

 

 

iv.                        scatter

 

many phrases starts with shatter.                                    , crossing

           the parking lot, my skin     pixilated in the sodium light,

harsh corundum               skin a vapor trail                    edging

      the slipstream.            Tidy up the floorboards.            the wiggling

infrastructure of a signature.                        says, I’ve been here

           before                    All airs as if a unified field.                  of

  night.      of     Claire.                  Collapse, arrangement

           of bones   where the elephant toppled.                  spells are cast,

 

Luster in clusters,                        stone I toss          Chicago,

the old ferry   through the house’s eye,  through the firmament     Light

     bulbs wilting,            carnations flickering,      Like a cyst the crick

dribbles outward                         toward   a shore     my lady trickles,

my lady pours          Give up give up,            my sweet canteen

Been taken to the forest.      Honey.                  Among the wild fission.

"
"

I’m standing in field 17 of the long series, employing my scythe.

Sometimes a conceptual dog bounds

past me, though it’s never my conceptual dog.

Occasionally future laureates gather for colloquium,

though they’re rarely my future

laureates. Thus, evening proceeds precisely

the way the handbook describes it:

as a proceeding: a runnel: shallow and babbling.

 

Into it a stranger appears. He looks like my friend.

I ask him, Are you my friend? Gravity telegraphs

its heavy message through the lolling

vines. The strangers says, I’ve sold all my clothes

and am considering, for a career, perpetual suffering.

The sun slides a tongue down the nape of the grain elevator.

Lowing cattle. It’s the fourth of July. In Spain.

I say, You are most vague and mysterious, friend.

The dog paces. I set my scythe aside and tell him,

I have employed this scythe mercilessly all my life and still

everywhere these stalks extend. He says,

Someone is always worse off than us

even at our most pitiable. Yes, I say. I read it once

in a magazine. And we laugh, let our enormous bellies jangle.

It is good to laugh with my friend and let the scythe cool, I say.

Yes, he says. Good.

 

"
"







NYTimes headline for September 4th 2012:


Elephants Dying in Epic Frenzy As Ivory Fuels Wars and Profits







          They return to the site whence they came with eyes tearful,

with psalms trumpeting the air.

They stand ever so watchful;

guarding the graves of their ghosts and their kind.

They shall not forget.  They shall not want.

They lie down in green silky pastures

and finding their way to the still waters.

They restore and nourish their soul.

They walk through the dark valleys; always the shadows

of death lurking behind them.

Always striding till they reach the comforting light.

They fear no evil.  Man fears.

They forage for food and they eat amongst their enemies

because they fear not.  They are the happiest.

The honey is under their tongue.

The winter is past, the rain is over and gone.

Their hearts awaken.  They know no violence.

Even in the waning light they tower over all else.

They are the landscape.  They are the trees.

They throw up the dust in their dance.  The skies become misty.

They rise up and lead each other away into the dusk.

"
"

Toward summer or its dependence

On demarcations in the sandy vial

Some tree spelling astronaut onto a

Planet’s arm, it stopped making sense.

I am not an apothecary or a wave

Or a dog by the 15th hole, I am not

A light sparking a whole country’s demise.

I will never be a towel holding someone’s

Sunscreen while they wash it off in foreign

Seas. My hair goes up and down, it’s true

As it is I am not a bag of tea nor will I ever

Be exceptionally happy. Let the director

Know I was distressed by the construction

Noise, that I had no known allergies that

My parents convinced me I was wanted

And why wouldn’t you believe them.

If the earth when it opened dragged away

Our sense of faith, doubt was an

Invention I preferred to ignore in the

Manner of solicitations by mail.

"
"







After “She was the song of my dark hour,” a photograph by Paul Tañedo







I woke up

and I was old—

 

It’s hard to judge

if this new country

 

was worth

its costs—

 

Fil and Eileen

educated themselves—

 

They blessed me

with their happiness—

 

Roy and Glen

lost themselves

 

to a car accident

and something worse

 

(that I will not reveal

even for a poem)—

 

When I see myself

reflected in a mirror

 

I turn away to hide

both my eyes, all of my self—

 

when half of your

children are destroyed

 

the half who flourish

cannot compensate

 

exactly

                        as if

 

a heart breaksexactly down the middle.

 

"
"

All that's left is the shroud

                                  the back wings. Roaches

scurrying in the kitchen. There’s no

greater threat than this time at hand.

      Drunken cackles from the street. Still damp

                                                         from 4 AM rain.

I missed the instructions for this part. The trap.

The deflate of dream. Utopia was always

supposed to be right at hand. Right and left.

Any which way we’d make of it.

                                                    Marine layer

won’t budge for the rumble under our feet. Sky

tears open in the north. Sirens

on high. A small pool forms

in the buckle of asphalt.

In its gentle tremble

the reflection of the grey

white mass overhead

with a perfect seam of blue.

The rift where

the dead speak

how-tos.

 

"
"

The number of bodies i have

is equal to the number of

gurney transfers that are

televised.

 

If we’re all “just human”  

then who is responsible?

 

A fire station drying out

from addiction. outside

the drizzling of firepower,

lowballing suns

 

it’s like a sauna in here.

the strain of a charred

bladder. bottled water

bad wiring,

 

that spark is no good

come sit with me for a

minute. my feet full of

diluted axe fluid

 

thought I heard you say

everything is medicine

but that’s just hearin

what you wanna hear

 

"
"







November 9, 2016


University of Notre Dame







minutes

felt

like hours

 

""deplorables

knocking

at your door""

 

he shouted

the day

after—“build

 

the wall—

we're

building

 

a wall

around

your room!""

 

minutes

felt

like hours

 

""cowards!""

you managed,

catching

 

a glimpse

by cracking

your door:

 

there were three

of them

scurrying

 

down the hall,

their faces

obscured…

 

your back

against

the wall, you slid

 

to the floor—

""Hail Mary...""

you began

 

whispering

to yourself

and back

 

they came their

laughter 

louder

 

minutes

felt

like hours

 

and the thumping

in your chest—

his fist

 

pounding the door

 

 

        for Gregory Jenn ('18)

 

"
"

it doesn’t matter when I cross.

two seconds and they’re gone.

the ferry facing Ulus. the trees

that spanked of green. the narrow

bags of temples. beyond that –

just – these Peri scenes

 

            when the human body sweats             the skin produce an oil

 

            when Peri bodies sweat            it does not produce the oil

 

the ropes fall to the pavement

their waters slap me still

their green glow sweats

into the pavement waters

slap me still –

 

            I could curl among the roses

             I would make an aqualung

 

we will reach the edge of this walk soon.

all lights torn out for fuel.

 

            move my fingers in the dark

 

awoke without a start.

Peri here – my name is Peri –

 

my name is Perihan

"
"

Spoiler alert: in this all-but-forgotten

masterwork, Jean Stafford—who was once

widely regarded as the leading novelist

 

of her generation, and who wrote

this perverse, short,

lyrical novel, her second, during

 

the flailing failings

of her marriage to my hero

Robert Lowell—kills

 

Molly, her child-alter ego,

a girl too unloved and unloving

to survive puberty, too

 

pure and awful—like Stafford, who died

pickled and childish three

decades later after winning

 

the Pulitzer with her devastating,

hurtfully compassionate Collected Stories—for this or any other world,

 

especially the necessarily

allegorical one of fiction.

I am broken now, hopeless; hope

 

is proved by this book to be

a contrivance. I have just

read the last pages in which

 

Molly’s brother, Ralph—who,

to live, cannot love

either, has no spare love—shoots

 

her, aiming for the wild mountain

lion whose stuffed corpse

was to be the triumph

 

of his new manhood. I don’t

hate Ralph—how can I, a boy,

mistaken, like me? And can I hate

 

Molly, who so needed Ralph

and everyone, still young enough to savor

the bittersweet of her anger?

 

What about Stafford, who hurt

herself, all our selves, with

this ending, her classic tragedy, writing,

 

decades later, Poor old Molly! I loved her dearly and I hope she rests in peace.

 

Fuck insight and analysis:

my heart is shot. Why

did she have to die? Why does

 

anyone? Why do you, do I?

Because of what Ralph was

feeling just before he accidentally

 

slaughtered the future? This book

must have ravaged the already

sleepless poet Gregory Orr,

 

who shot his brother, too, and

suffers that endless error

in poetry and prose. And because Molly

 

refused everything, she stood between

Ralph and tomorrow. But he grew, he

changed. Confused? Read

 

the book. In novels

people die because of what they feel.

In life, people die when

 

their bodies conk out,

exhausted machines that living

expends. And what

 

happens when people feel

their feelings in life?

Nothing? Anything? Brenda,

 

dear Brenda, my love, nothing

happens, I’m afraid. I’m sorry. And afraid.

A small breeze born in the heart

 

gently bends a blade of grass

and no one hears a word.

No one reads Stafford anymore—I asked

 

on Facebook. Stafford died, her

legacy gently dispatched

into the low air. O, life

 

is terrible, literature

ridiculous. Stafford’s prose,

teeming and rich as loam,

 

could take Famous Franzen’s

for a walk, feed it biscuits.

But who cares? Who remembers?

 

O, to have been Jean Stafford,

in the past I idealize, when the world

was less self-conscious, less

 

precise. I could be

dead already, warmish

beneath a blanket of dust. Joyful

 

are the faded, the once-greats

whose afterlives slipped out

a hole in posterity's pocket:

 

they are loved poignantly by

a needy few. O, to be kept

cozy in the bosoms of those

 

desperate and proud, forgotten

for all the good I do. Love

is sunlight streaming unevenly

 

through the canopy of leaves

overhead. We can only grow

in the brighter patches below, fading

 

where light is thin. Molly,

we are with you, nowhere and gone.

Mostly we are forgotten, too.

 

"
"

I live with the small shame

of not knowing the multiple names for blue

to describe the nightsky over New Mexico

to describe the light in my lover’s eyes.

 

It is a small shame that grows.

 

I live with the small shame

which resides in the absences of my speech

as I pause to search for the word in Spanish

to translate a poem to my Father

who sits there waiting

who scans my eyes to see

what I cannot fully describe

who waits for the word from me

the word that escapes me in the moment

the word I fear has never resided within me.

 

It is a small shame that grows

when indigo and cerulean are merely azul

and not añil and cerúleo.

 

"
"

Let us praise the immigrant

who leaves the tropics

and arrives in Chicago

in the dead of winter.

 

Let us praise the immigrant

who has never worn coats

who must bundle up

against an unimaginable cold.

 

For they will write letters home

that speak of it like Norse sagas

with claims that if a frigid hell exists

the entrance is hidden somewhere in this city.

 

Let us praise the immigrant

who fears the depths of the subway

the disappearance of landmarks

to guide them through the labyrinth.

 

Let us praise the immigrant

who dreams of the pleasures of sunstroke

who wakes each morning to the alien sight

of their breath suspended in the cold city air.

 

"
"







Hatred as an element of the struggle; a relentless hatred of the enemy, impelling us over and beyond the natural limitations that man is heir to and transforming him into an effective, violent, selective and cold killing machine. Our soldiers must be thus; a people without hatred cannot vanquish a brutal enemy.

                                                                                                    —Che Guevara

 

Tengo una remera del Che y no sé por qué,


I have a Che t-shirt and I don’t know why.


          —Contemporary Argentine saying







I see the red shirt at the peace rally

and think of my parents

who left everyone and every

thing they knew and loved

save for the coin

forgotten in my brother’s baby jacket.

 

Men like me in Cuba

failed the test of this symbol’s manhood,

were called “Western perversions”

were imprisoned and made to labor.

 

Thousands, like these assembled,

were rounded up in the middle of the night

driven to the far countryside to cut sugarcane

for a revolution’s economic quotas.

 

Tio Alberto’s eyes go blank

when he speaks of the price he paid:

three years of forced hard labor

to work like a dog in the sun

for the privilege of leaving his own country.

 

I think of the chain of caudillos that promised

one thing and delivered another.

"
"

In that very first episode

the transmission is received on the starship Enterprise

that Space Commander Dominguez urgently needs his supplies.

Kirk tells Uhura to assure him

that the peppers are “prime Mexican reds

but he won’t die if he goes a few more days without ’em.”Calm down Mexican.You can wait a few more days to get your chile peppers.

 

In the corner of my eye I see Uhura’s back hand twitch

and though I never see him on the screen

I image José giving Kirk a soplamoco to the face.

 

But this is the year 2266 and there are Latinos in Outer Space!

We never see them, but they’ve survived with their surnames

and their desire, deep in the farthest interplanetary reaches,

for a little heat to warm the bland food on the starbase at Corinth 4.

As it is on earth so it shall be in heaven.

 

Ricardo Montalbán will show up 21 episodes later

to play a crazy mutant Indio,

superhuman and supersmart

who survived two centuries

to slap Kirk around and take over his ship.

 

"
"

when i was 7, i hoped rocks would whisper

the secret to being hard. fascinated by Keisha’s skin

so soft, i seduced her into humping even though she

was five years my senior and my babysitter—click of the light

covers snatched away like a magic trick reveal

i could hear Keisha wail one floor up

through the radiator pipes—i was the victim.

 

at 7, i decided i should’ve been born

a boy, a he, a him. blamed my mama for her mistake.

prayed for a penis and practiced peeing standing up

until it came: aim, angle of lean, and straddle were crucial.

toilet seat up, knees clamping the cool rim i let go

of the golden flow feeling the warm wet trickle down my legs

darkening my dungarees a new shade of blue.

 

at 7, i was never afraid of putting things in my mouth:

i chewed my fingernails till they bled, chewed pencils

till the yellow paint flaked me a crusty mustache,

chewed pen caps into odd sculptures, chewed pens until

the inky cylinders leaked a Rorschach on my face

kids pointing as i ran to the bathroomoooh a butterfly! no, a thundercloud …

 

i wore my iron-on Bruce Lee sweatshirt till his face cracked

and faded invisible. still, i felt invincible when i wore it

kicking lunch tables with my shins. karate-chopping pencils

in two. forever trying to impress the skirts with my awkward

brand of goof. punching my arm to make lumps

rise out of the bony sinew. at 7, i knew

how to make a girl cry.

 

"
"

be born: black

as ants on a chicken bone black

 

as Nina Simone and Mahalia’s moan black

as rock pile smile and resilience black

 

as resistance and rhythm and Sonny’s blues black

as no shoes and dirt floors black

 

as whore and Hottentot foxtrot Lindy Hop

and Watusi pussy and pyramids black

 

as darkness under your eyelids black

between your legs black

 

as dregs of rum sugarcane summer

plums holyghost hum black

 

as bruised throat fieldholla wading in the shallow black

as ocean river stream creek running black

 

transparent translucent transatlantic slanted

shanties planted in red clay black

 

as funky chickens and chitlins and kinfolk sold away black

as auction block and slop and hip-hop and rock and roll

 

and chop shop and cop cars and parole and overseer

patrols and one drop rules and pools of blood black

 

as beige and good hair and sounding white and light-skindeded

and my grandmamma is Cherokee, Iroquois, Choctaw black

 

as pit bulls and lockjaw and rage and hoodies black

eyes and black-eyed peas peasy heads and loose tracks black

 

as trees and noose and hounds let loose in the night black

as fist and fight Sojourner and Nat Turner and righteousness black

 

as fuck and not giving a fuck mud-stuck and quicksand

quick hand hustle thigh muscle and hurdle black

 

as cotton and tobacco and indigo black

as wind and bad weather and feather

 

and tar and snap beans in mason jars black

as nigga please and hallelujah black

 

asses and black strap molasses and turn your black

back on audiences black

 

as banjo and djembe and porch and stoop and spooks

sitting by the door black

 

as roaches in front of company and lawn jockeys

and latchkey kids and high bids and spades and shittalk black

 

as cakewalk and second line and black

magic and tap dance, lapdance and alla that ass black

 

as jazz and juke and juju and spirit

disguised as harmonica spit black

 

as cast-iron skillets and grits and watermelon seeds

flitting from lips black

 

as tambourines hitting cornbread hips black

batons splitting lips and Martin Luther King, Jr.

 

boulevards and downtown beatdowns black

sit-ins and come-ups and oops upside yo’ heads

 

and we shall overcomes and get down on it black

get into it black let’s get it on and get it

 

while the getting is good black

as white hoods and backwood revivals black

 

as survival and Trayvon and Tyrone and Josephus

and amen and Moses and Jesus and getting over

 

black—

 

"
"







               for those of us who can’t quite quit her







when the poem flirts

similes hugging her thighs

 

like a tight skirt: consider

the possibilities.

 

if the poem follows

you home, whiskey

 

pickling her tongue:

make her coffee, black.

 

if the poem arrives

dressed as metaphor,

 

begging for candy: trick

or retreat till the mask falls.

 

should the poem slink

outta panties, stand

 

naked demanding touch:

finger her lines

 

till her stanzas beg

for an encore: come

 

again, explore, imagine odd

positions of sweet revision.

 

and whenever she whispers,stop: listen and leave her be.

 

"
"







             July 13, 2013







Saturday afternoon: in the driveway between buildings they blow up

balloons—yellow, red, blue—for a 3-year-old’s party.

 

The intermittent pops startle me like random gunfire—remind me

of birthdays brown boys will no longer celebrate.

 

The DJ, having set up the speakers, begins to play—the music, a rapid fire

of bass thump, commandeers the apartment. We have no choice but leave.

 

An art show: canvases colored with boxes and lines—a grid of red

on a backdrop of yellow. We speak of the abstract with wine in our mouths.

 

Meanwhile, in an antechamber, six are sequestered. They speak of mali-

cious intent, blood, evidence, testimony—murder versus manslaughter.

 

We arrive home to a throng of brown bodies, hands clutching red cups,

and music: its insistent treble stabbing the ears.

 

Inside, we slam all windows, but the music still blares as my niece shoots

people on the video game—its sounds are too realistic to bear.

 

Instead, the news, a verdict is in: not guilty. And everything is a blur

of sound, my heart beating so fast I put a hand to my chest.

 

I watch the TV screen: a collage of abstractions—spotlights, microphones,

smiles, handwritten signs. I stare, as if it were a painting—

 

a smear of twisted faces smothered in gesso and oil, a grid of red

on a backdrop of yellow—to make sense of.

 

The party continues. The 3-year-old probably in bed dreaming of melted

ice cream, and I am tired of partying.

 

There is a police station a half block away and I want it to burn. Instead,

only the smoke of weed, the meaningless music droning on,

 

the popping of balloons. Sunday morning, the birds are angry—their

chirping a noisy chant: NO NO NO NO. Outside, the rubbery flesh

 

of balloons color the driveway like splotches of paint. In an instant,

those still lives of heave and breath—gone in a pop.

 

"
"

It showed the War was as my father said:

boredom flanked by terror, a matter of keeping

low and not freezing. “You wore your helmet

 

square,” he said, not “at some stupid angle,

like that draft-dodger Wayne,” who died

so photogenically in The Sands of Iwa Jima.

 

Those nights I heard shouts from the dark

of my parents’ room, he was back down

in his foxhole, barking orders, taking fire

 

that followed him from France and Germany,

then slipped into the house, where it hunkered

in the rafters and thrived on ambush. We kept

 

our helmets on, my mother and I,

but there was no cover, and our helmets

always tilted. He’d lump us with the ones

 

he called “JohnDoes,” lazy, stupid, useless.

We needed to straighten up and fly right,

pick it up, chop chop, not get “nervous

 

in the service.” We’d duck down like GIs

where German snipers might be crouched

in haylofts, their breaths held for the clean shot.

 

“Bang,” my father said, “the dead went down,

some like dying swans, some like puppets

with their strings cut.” I wanted to hear more,

 

but he’d change the subject, talk about

the pennant, the Cards’ shaky odds, how Musial

was worth the whole JohnDoe lot of them.

 

"
"

How burdensome they seemed, wartime

oldies that could drive our parents teary:

 

“I’ll Be Seeing You,” with its hint

of being swept off in a global riptide;

 

or the shaky follow-up of “I’ll Be Home

for Christmas,” followed by a shakier

 

“Don’t Sit Under the Apple Tree

(with Anyone Else But Me),” “Comin’

 

in on a Wing and a Prayer,” or “Ac-

Cent-Tchu-Are the Positive.” We suffered

 

them on the old cathedral radio, crooned

by Crosby and Sinatra, had to watch them

 

strangled on The Lawrence Welk Show

or laced with Como’s heavy dose

 

of sedative. Dad told us, “Straighten Up

and Fly Right.” Mom hummed, “Keep

 

the Home Fires Burning”—till our music

cut the cord. Brash and free of corn,

 

it hailed rock ‘n’ roll, caught Maybellene

at the top of the hill, moaned “m’ baby-doll,

 

m’ baby-doll, m’ baby-doll.” We played it

loud and often, but they never understood.

 

"
"

You better rap, my brother

says—he can

b-box his ass off.

Got DJ scratches and spins,

 

will drop it on the two

and four, the three and four.

Whatever you need.

 

Me posing my bars: My flowsare second to none, come here,son. See how it’s done.

 

Wanted to be a rapper? Check.

Thought I was going to the NBA? Check.

Father went to prison? Check.

Brother too? Check.

Mother died when I was eight? Check.

Hung pictures of Luke Perry

on my bedroom wall?

 What?

 

Yep, give me a bit, and I’ll sprinkle

some subjectivity on it.

 

I loved that dude, his whisper-voice, his lean.

Auntie worried on the phone:Girl, he got photos of some white boyall over his walls. Me rocking out

to Tom Petty’s “You Don’t Know How It Feels.”

 

Silent head nods do more

than throw shade.

 All black people are fluent

 in silence. Mangled Baldwin quote?

Let’s keep wrenching. Everybody’s

 

fluent in silence.

 

You know what

a switchblade glare means. No need

to read the look she gave me

 

as I sang, Let me run with you tonight.

"
"

When the junkies my father sold crack to got

too close to me, he told them to back up

 

six dicks’ lengths. This is the man who when I was

seven caught me under the bed crying and said:

 Save those tears. You’ll need them later.

The man who told me he smoked crack

 

because he liked it, the man sitting on his couch

now watching the History Channel, scratching

 

the nub beneath his knee where his leg used to be,

gumming plums, his false teeth

 

soaking in vinegar on the table. I’m sitting

across the room trying to conjure each version

 

he’s shown of himself, trying to lie

in water warm enough

 

to soak away the switch he hit me with.

To help me summon love for the man

 

who just asked me if he can borrow 200 dollars,

the man who once told me: Wish

 in one hand, then shit in the other,and see which one fills up the quickest.

"
"

We shouldn’t raise mixed babiesin the South, Kay says as I drive up the crest

of another hill on our way into Kentucky.

 

The South, where humidity leaves

a sweat mustache, where a truck

with a Confederate flag painted

 

on the back windshield skitters in front

of us. In its bed, avoiding our eyes,

a boy with blond hair

 

split down the middle like a Bible

left open to the Book of Psalms.

His shirtless, sun-licked skin drapes,

 

a thin coat for his bones, his clavicles sharp.

I want to know who’s driving this raggedy truck.

I want the boy to look at us. I want

 

to spray paint a black fist over that flag.

I want the truck to find its way

into the ravine. I want to—

 

Stepping on the gas, I pass the truck,

Kay and I turn our heads. The boy smiles

and waves. The man driving doesn’t

 

turn his head, keeps his eyes on the road. Kay

turns red as she draws her fingers

into fists. I stare at the whites of her eyes.

 

"
"

I swear on the melody of trumpet vines,

ants feasting through animal crackers, Burt’s Bees,

Tyler Perry movies, my daddy’s .38 slug, footie-socks

inside high-top Jordans, disidentification, drag

queens, blond dreadlocks, headstones

salt-and-peppering the grass, vanilla wafers

in banana pudding, Zeus-swan chasing,

blunt-guts, sharp thumbnails, keloid scars,

cash-only bars, R&B songs, on what the pot

called the kettle. I put that on my mama’s good

hair, on playing solitaire with a phantom

limb, the white woman I go home to,

my auntie’s face when she says: You knowhe always loved them pink toes. I put that on

everything, on the signifiers I gobble up,

candlesticks blown out by whistling lips.

I put that on dervishing records scratched

on down-beats, empty beehives,

fresh-fade head-slaps, hand claps, bamboo shoots,

liminality, mestizos, the purple-black crook

of my arm, split sternums, on You can’t savehim now. I put that on skinny jeans, get rich

quick schemes—Gotta get that C.R.E.A.M. Know whatI mean?—freckled black faces, leafless trees

throwing up gang signs, phlegm hocked

onto streets. I swear I catch more stones

than catfish. I lose more collard greens than sleep. I think

nothing is here but us darkies, high yellows, red bones,

cocoa butters. Someone, no, everyone has jungle fever.Don’t touch my forehead. Blond

as moonshine, mute trombone choking.

I put that on Instagram. Post me to the endless chain

of signifiers. Strawberry gashes on kneecaps, Let meget some dap, Newports, Kool’s, and folding

chairs instead of barstools, that white drool

caked on your face. Mommy please wipe awaythe veil. I thought I was passing into the eyeof the streetlamp. I swear. I promise on frondless

palm trees, long pinkie nails, sixteen years, serve eight,

and Miss Addie’s red beans and rice, Ol’ Dirty Bastard

and the brother on the Cream of Wheat box. It don’t meana thing if it don’t buckle your knees. Open your hands.

I’ll give you a song, give you the Holy Ghost

from a preacher’s greasy palm—When he hit me, I didn’t

fall, felt eyes jabbing me, tagging me. Oh no he didn’t!—

give you the om from the small of her back.

I put that on double consciousness, multiple jeopardy,

and performativity. Please make sure my fettersand manacles are tight. Yea baby, I like bottomlessbullet chambers. I swear on the creation of Uncle Tom—

some white woman's gospel. She got blue eyes? I loveme some—on Josiah Henson, the real Uncle Tom, on us still

believing in Uncle Tom. Lord, have mercy!

Put that on the black man standing on my shoulders holding

his balls. Put that on the black man I am—I am not—on

the black man I wish I was.

 

"
"

She cannot imagine it otherwise.

She wakes in the morning and twists her ring,

loves how every night in their bed he lies

 

breathing warm in the dark and never shies

away. He lets her talk, he lets her sing.

She cannot imagine it otherwise.

 

One night she’s surprised how gently he tries

to move her arm when he thinks she’s sleeping.

In the night, in their bed, she sees he lies

 

watching the ceiling long before sunrise.

Too much coffee, too many late nights working.

She cannot imagine it otherwise.

 

He quiets. The more she worries and pries

the less he tells her about anything.

She’s sure every night in their bed he lies

 

wanting a room beyond reach of her eyes.

He sighs—she cries so much, Over nothing.

She cannot imagine it otherwise:

Every night in their bed, he lies.

"
"

There was a bucket, there was a wall,

there was a woman and a man.

 

The woman carried the bucket

and the man was the wall.

There was no place else to go.

 

It was a long, long time

for there was much to carry

and there was much to wall.

 

There was a path ran straight

from the well to the hole in the wall.

There was a path ran crooked

from the well to the wood.

 

There was something in the wood

bigger than the bucket.

 

Woe to the man, woe to the wall.

Woe to the bucket at the edge

of the wood.

 

"
"

Let it finally be Friday, let me drive

downtown before five, park in the one

space left open in front and feed the meter

the exact change it needs. Let me go into the office,

sit and nod, unfold my check on the table

and sign. Let the line not be dotted, let it

be solid. Let it be my name.

Let it be final.

 

Let me pull into the driveway while

it is still light. It’s well past five and well

into October and they are just about

to change the time. Saturday night

on the local news they’ll remind

us all to Fall Back, but I make it in

under the wire. There is still light.

There is still time.

 

I am up the back porch steps, under

the awning, my hand on the back door lock

the realtor left on. Let me remember rightly

the numbers he gave me. Let this not be the dream

of the high school locker with the Master Lock

whose combination you forgot or fumbled, turning

too fast, going too far, everything you’d locked up

irretrievable, lost.

Let the lock fall open, let me leave it

on the steps for the realtor to pick up.

Let him pull up the flimsy stakes

of the sign in the yard that says I can be bought,

let him drive away. Let no Master

enter through my door.

 

Let the house be a disaster, I don’t care.

Let the smoke-framed blanks where another

woman’s pictures marked the wall be the story

of how my edges caught fire and the ash at last

let me see where I stood. Let the cracked

kitchen floor make a map to teach me

where not to step, how not to fall through

and break my very own back.

Let the broken window be a way out,

the broken door a way in. Let me go

to the hardware store and buy the tools

to take the chain off the bedroom door,

let me paint the bathroom pink without asking,

walk naked and unafraid through all my rooms.

 

Let me pick up a broom and sweep

nothing under the rug. Let me sweep it all

into the light. Let me do it. Let there be time.

Let there be light.

 

"
"

doesn’t come with feathers.

It lives in flip-flops and, in cold weather,

a hooded sweatshirt, like a heavyweight

in training, or a monk who has taken

a half-hearted vow of perseverance.

It only has half a heart, the hope I know.

The other half it flings to every stalking hurt.

It wears a poker face, quietly reciting

the laws of probability, and gladly

takes a back seat to faith and love,

it’s that many times removed

from when it had youth on its side

and beauty. Half the world wishes

to stay as it is, half to become

whatever it can dream,

while the hope I know struggles

to keep its eyes open and its mind

from combing an unpeopled beach.

Congregations sway and croon,

constituents vote across their party line,

rescue parties wait for a break

in the weather. And who goes to sleep

with a prayer on the lips or half a smile

knows some kind of hope.

Though not the hope I know,

which slinks from dream to dream

without ID or ally, traveling best at night,

keeping to the back roads and the shadows,

approaching the radiant city

without ever quite arriving.

 

"
"

The god in me does not honor

the god in you. The god in you

murdered me once, and once

was more than enough.

So the god in me, adept

at keeping my nature warm

and inspired to love the benign,

now prefers the chilly air

of indifference, something picked up

like a virus from the most vicious

of mortals. The god in me

regards the god in you

as suspect, though sad

to say, it wasn’t always so.

There were the generous days

in the beginning, when every word

was made flesh. In the beginning

the gods in us were content

to let us go on

behaving like perfect mortals,

which is to say imperfectly,

which is to say with our tenderness

fully intact: the good kind

that let us gladly undress

our trepidations, and pleasure

our solitude into a blissful

oblivion; and the bad kind—

invisible woundings

no compliment or hot kiss,

no confession of the amorous

could soothe for long.

And then, when the mortals we were

had done enough to remind us

that to be mortal is to be susceptible

to the secret agenda, the cruel caprice,

the soft but eviscerating voice—

“at the mercy of a nuance”—

the god in you decided it was time

to act. A dark god, in need

of a human sacrifice, smoothly turning your back

on the earnest and their pathetic pleas.

So the god in me, no stranger to the aberrant

and the abhorrent, now has no choice

but to respond in kind. A pity, really,

since it has been the dream

of so many gods to find themselves

in some quiet room, the burden of power

slipped off and scattered

like clothes across the floor, the light

of late afternoon a kind of benediction,

and everywhere the gratitude

for the privilege of feeling

almost human.

"
"

When, in the science museum, I arrive at the overview

of our galaxy, with its tiny arrow pointing to You are here

(which really ought to be We are here), and see

that the two to four hundred billion stars of our local cluster

are drifting or chasing or dreaming after each other

in circles within milky circles, I can’t help but think

 

of those ancient paintings and rock engravings,

discovered all over our celestial body,

of that one line which begins at whatever point

it can, then curls outward, or inward, toward nothing

anyone can define—the oldest shape revered

by Aborigine and Celt, by mathematician

 

and engineer and Burning Man reveler alike,

and even accorded a place of honor among the mess

of thoughts on my desk, as a nifty paper clip of copper.

But it’s already there in the florets of the sunflower

crisscrossing with the precision of a logarithm,

and in the pin-wheel shape of the Nautilus shell,

 

and in the coiling neurons of the cochlea

that let us tell Art Tatum from a three year old’s improvisation.

Call it what you will—“God's fingerprint,” “the soul

unfolding through time,” “the passageway into the Self”—

I can’t help but admire, even fear, something as mundane

as a flush of the toilet, when its swirling is a variation

 

on our sidereal drift, our existential pain.

And then there’s that famous falcon, “turning and turning

in a widening gyre,” a portentous symbol of our own

circling into some dread, some pernicious chaos

we thought we had just escaped, one town burning

a decade behind us, a millennium before that,

 

and into next week, next year, next whenever.

And when the two of us took that winding road

an infinity of others had wound down before us

and would wind down again, our spirits hushed

by the crosses and bouquets at each dead man’s curve

and just burning in the dry heat to touch each other,

 

wasn’t that a wondrous and terrible turning?

"
"

Elle’s writing her book of wisdom.

She writes until she cannot hold her pen.

The labyrinth miraculously is uncovered.

 

An American woman’s progressing on her knees.

She read something but not Elle’s book.

No one will read Elle’s book.

 

I walk the circular path, first the left side,

then the right, casting petals to the north,

east, south, and west (this intuitively).

 

A diminutive prelate shoos me away.

When he leaves, I return to the center.

The organist, practicing, strikes up Phantom.

 

Elle says she cannot hear him.Elle! I cry, I cannot see you.I had prayed Death spare you.

 Remember our meal among the termitesof Arcadia Street, that cottage of spiritswith its riddled beams and long veranda

 bordered by plantain trees, and the spiralyou traced for me on scrap-paper?I kept it for such a long time.

 

The organist, of course, is playing Bach.

A boy has scattered the petals I threw.

Elle’s voice surrounds me.

 

                                                                      The quiet hills I lift mine eyes. 

 

"
"

There was an ancient well-site beneath the labyrinth

I did not reach, the part underground,

labeled (what else?) The Crypt.

 

But labels always hide something

about what they seem to define.

They set the thing apart

 

without disclosing why.

Alive costs a pretty penny

to see The Crypt now.

 

"
"

Everything looped, spiraled, circular (thought)

But the labyrinth’s not a maze but a singular way

to strike “the profoundest chord”across aspire

 

Those who enter the labyrinth can leave

(pilgrims sometime don’t)

(Elle did not)

Inside the largest circle

 

(the labyrinth itself)

splits into equal parts

(demi-arcs or waves)

No, silly, Elle whispers, petals

 

          If measured through the centre of the petals there should be two parts for each

          petal and one for the entry, but calculations from the measurements show that          this is not so. The difference is about ½”. There is no way around this problem.

 

We must seek a solution

to the geometry of petals,

the consequential mystery

of Elle’s message:

 I was sick and am nothealed.     I am not blindbut dead.     I am not deadbut silenced.     Alone, in love.

 

"
"

Soon as the sun forsook the eastern main

The pealing thunder shook the heav'nly plain;

Majestic grandeur! From the zephyr's wing,

Exhales the incense of the blooming spring.

Soft purl the streams, the birds renew their notes,

And through the air their mingled music floats.

Through all the heav'ns what beauteous dies are spread!

But the west glories in the deepest red:

So may our breasts with ev'ry virtue glow,

The living temples of our God below!

Fill'd with the praise of him who gives the light,

And draws the sable curtains of the night,

Let placid slumbers sooth each weary mind,

At morn to wake more heav'nly, more refin'd;

So shall the labours of the day begin

More pure, more guarded from the snares of sin.

Night's leaden sceptre seals my drowsy eyes,

Then cease, my song, till fair Aurora rise.

"
"

This morning I was walking upstairs

from the kitchen, carrying your

beautiful flowers, the flowers you

 

brought me last night, calla lilies

and something else, I am not

sure what to call them, white flowers,

 

of course you had no way of knowing

it has been years since I bought

white flowers—but now you have

 

and here they are again. I was carrying

your flowers and a coffee cup

and a soft yellow handbag and a book

 

of poems by a Chinese poet, in

which I had just read the words “come

or go but don’t just stand there

 

in the doorway,” as usual I was

carrying too many things, you

would have laughed if you saw me.

 

It seemed especially important

not to spill the coffee as I usually

do, as I turned up the stairs,

 

inside the whorl of the house as if

I were walking up inside the lilies.

I do not know how to hold all

 

the beauty and sorrow of my life.

"
"







for Max Ritvo







I

 

Three weeks until summer and then—what?

Midsummer’s gravity makes our heads spin

each hour a gilt thread spool, winding through

the second hand, gossamer fin de semaine,fin de siècle, fin slicing the water

of the too-cold-to-breathe bay, molten silver,

then receding as if we hadn’t seen it,

sultan of so long, see you tomorrow.

               Dead man’s fingers, lady’s slippers, a seal

who swims too close—too close for what? The needle

swerves. Our element chooses us. Water

fire, air, earth—the rosebush, Lazarus,

hot to the touch, gold reticulate, is love’s

bull’s-eye, attar rising from the rafters.

 

 

II

 

If I could make it stop I would. Was it

the crocodile Hook feared, or was it time?

The hour’s arrow never misses, the gnomon,

glinting, cuts the Day-Glo sun to pieces.

In the ultraviolet palace of the Mermaid King

his girls wear scallop shells, one for each year

on their turquoise tails. Even they have birthdays,

why not you? Death, hold your ponies with one

hand, and stay awhile. On my desk, the lion’s

paw lamps scavenged from the winter beach,

its poppy-colored shells like the lit scales

of an enormous Trojan fish … teeth chattering,

its metronome time bomb tsk tsk—

when is giving up not giving in?

 

 

III (child’s pose)

 

When Alice pulled the stopper, did she get

smaller, or did the world get larger? In

the bath, your nose bleeds a bouquet of tissue

roses, white stained red—adolescence

is to overdo it, but really? Thirty

stories up, our birds’-eye view is

the hummingbird tattoo on your bare head,

wings beating, too tiny and too big to see,

your wire-thin profile drawn upright, bones

               daring the air, marionette running on

the brain’s dark marrow, tungsten for the fireflies’

freeze tag. Due south, the Chrysler Building’s gauntlet

holds a lit syringe. We do and do not change.

Let me go from here to anywhere.

 

 

IV

 

That’s it for now. And so we turn the page

your poems standing in for you, or—that’s

not it, what’s left of you, mediating

between what you’d call mind and body

and I, by now biting my lip, call grief,

               the lines netting the enormous air

like silver threads, the tails of Mr. Edwards’s

spiders with which they sail from ledge to branch

“as when the soul feels jarred by nervous thoughts

and catch on air.” Pace. Your trousers worn

to mouse fur dragging on the stoop, your hip

prongs barely holding them aloft, the past

a phaeton, its sunlit reins bucking

at before and after, but there is no after.

 

 

V

 

Or is there? For once, when you rock back

on the chair I don’t say don’t do that,

forelegs lifting, hooves pawing the air—

Every departure’s an elopement,

the shy cat fiddling while Rome sizzles,

spoon mirror flipping us upside down.

               Son of Helios, rainbow fairy lights

blazing, when one light goes out they all

go out. At the top of the dune, the thorny

crowns of buried trees, their teeter-totter

branches a candelabra for the spiders’

silvery halo of threads. What a terrible

business it is, saying what you mean.

               Speak, sky, the horizon scored by talons.

"
"

Between the bent boughs

of the splayed sumac the silver

owl rests his head.

 

The perimeter

left by your absence is long

to walk in one day.

 

The angel in her

credenza of extreme beauty

dogs swim the river

 

I look for my heart

by the lamp where the light is

skitter in the wet black leaves

"
"

Our labor realized in the crowns

of marigolds, blue eyes of the hydrangeas,

smell of lavender and late bloom of the hosta’s

erect purple flower with its marvel of thick

green leaves. In our twilight

every year we trimmed back and the garden grew

more lustrous and untamable as if the eternal woods

and animals asleep at night in its beds were claiming it back.

The water in the pool shimmered an icy Tuscan blue.

 

When we arrived we swam

until the stress from the grueling

life in the city released our bodies. Later

we sat under the umbrella and watched a garter snake

slip into the water, careful not to startle

its flight-or-fight response. Its barbed-wire

coil. Comet of danger, serpent of the water,

how long we had thwarted the venom of its secret

lures and seductions.

It swam by arching then releasing

its slithery mercurial form.

Through the lanky trees

we heard the excited cries

of the neighbor’s children—ours, the boy in our late youth,

of our happiness and our struggles, the boy who made us whole

and broken, was in his room perhaps dreaming

of a girl and sleeping the long, tangled sleep of a teenager.

 

It was a miracle, our ignorance. It was grace

incarnate, how we never knew.

"
"

We loved them.

We got up early

to toast their bagels.

Wrapped them in foil.

We filled their water bottles

and canteens. We washed

and bleached their uniforms,

the mud and dirt

and blood washed clean

of brutality. We marveled

at their bodies,

thighs thick as the trunk

of a spindle pine,

shoulders broad and able,

the way their arms filled out.

The milk they drank.

At the plate we could make out

their particular stance, though each

wore the same uniform as if they were

cadets training for war.

If by chance one looked up at us

and gave us a rise with his chin,

or lifted a hand, we beamed.

We had grown used to their grunts,

mumbles, and refusal to form a full sentence.

We made their beds and rifled through their pockets

and smelled their shirts to see if they were clean.

How else would we know them?

We tried to not ask too many questions

and not to overpraise.

Sometimes they were ashamed of us;

if we laughed too loud,

if one of us talked too long to their friend,

of our faces that had grown coarser.Can’t you put on lipstick?

We let them roll their eyes,

curse, and grumble at us

after a game if they’d missed a play

or lost. We knew to keep quiet;

the car silent the entire ride home.

What they were to us was inexplicable.

Late at night, after they were home in their beds,

we sat by the window and wondered

when they would leave us

and who they would become

when they left the cocoon of our instruction.

What kind of girl they liked.

We sat in a group and drank our coffee

and prayed that they’d get a hit.

If they fumbled a ball or struck out

we felt sour in the pit of our stomach.

We paced. We couldn’t sit still or talk.

Throughout summer we watched

the trees behind the field grow fuller

and more vibrant and each fall

slowly lose their foliage—

it was as if we wanted to hold on

to every and each leaf.

"
"







“A fine Sunday in Bath empties every house of its inhabitants, and all the world appears on such an occasion to walk about and tell their acquaintance what a charming day it is.” —northanger abbey







I awoke from the tunnel

to the fields of yellow rape,

seventeenth-century buildings, and cobbled

streets as she would have seen them.

It was rainy; the rain came and went,

came and went so that you could not escape

its dampness. I understood the need for tea

and the luxury of cremes and pastries

and why the ladies longed for a strong shoulder

to see them through the winter.

The seagulls cried overhead,

though there was no sea, only a muddy river

from Bath to Bristol. The scavengers

lived on the rooftops and if desperate

enough would swoop down and take

a sandwich from your hand.

I secured my room at the Royal Bath Hotel.

It was a hovel, really, with a carpet

as old as the early century.

Walking through the hotel,

I sensed something lurid

in the air, every eye upon me as if they knew

I was a foreigner in a strange land.

Over the bed, a burgundy bedspread

dusty and faded as vintage wine,

made me long for the bright color of red.

In the next room, sleepless, I heard

through thin walls the sounds

of an un-tender coupling.

I looked in the warped mirror

and found myself ugly

and when I turned from it,

could not escape the vision.

It lingered. The rain came and went,

came and went. I took an umbrella

and began my walk, hoping to come upon

her quarters. I passed the Roman Baths,

the statues not beautiful,

but puckered and fossilled

and the Pump Room where her protagonist,

other self, doppelgänger,

good, strong, loyal Catherine,

longing for companionship, fell

under the seduction of Isabella

and her reprehensible brother.

Even then her coming out

seemed less magisterial,

and Bath a representation of the emptiness

and evils of society where a woman’s dowry

might confine her forever,

than a reprieve from country life.

I gave up my search.

Images were everywhere.

And my mind had been made up.

I perceived no romance

in the wind, no comfort in the hard

glances of strangers, girls with chipped nail polish,

lads unkempt as if there were no hope of glory.

The next morning I boarded the train

to the modern world and it wasn’t until a sheet

of blue slipped out like a love letter

from its envelope of dark gray sky

that I knew the journey had ended

and, like Catherine, I was finally safe.

"
"

Even now, after twice her lifetime of grief

and anger in the very place, whoever comes

to climb these narrow stairs, discovers how

the bookcase slides aside, then walks through

shadow into sunlit room, can never help

 

but break her secrecy again. Just listening

is a kind of guilt: the Westerkirk repeats

itself outside, as if all time worked round

towards her fear, and made each stroke

die down on guarded streets. Imagine it—

 

four years of whispering, and loneliness,

and plotting, day by day, the Allied line

in Europe with a yellow chalk. What hope

she had for ordinary love and interest

survives her here, displayed above the bed

 

as pictures of her family; some actors;

fashions chosen by Princess Elizabeth.

And those who stoop to see them find

not only patience missing its reward,

but one enduring wish for chances

 

like my own: to leave as simply

as I do, and walk at ease

up dusty tree-lined avenues, or watch

a silent barge come clear of bridges

settling their reflections in the blue canal.

 

"
"

By noon your breathing had changed from normal

to shallow and panicky. That’s when the nurse saidNearly there now, in the gentle voice of a parent

comforting a child used to failure, slipping her arms

beneath your shoulders to hoist you up the pillows,

then pressing a startling gauze pad under your jaw.

 

Nearly there now. The whole world seemed to agree—

as the late April sky deepened through the afternoon

into high August blue, the vapour trails of two planes

converged to sketch a cross on the brow of heaven.

My brother Kit and I kept our backs turned to that

except now and again. It was the room I wanted to see,

 

because it contained your last example of everything:

the broken metal window-catch that meant no fresh air;

your toothbrush standing to attention in its plastic mug;

the neutral pink walls flushed into definite pale red

by sunlight rejoicing in the flowering cherry outside;

your dressing-gown like a stranger within the wardrobe

 

eavesdropping. That should have been a sign to warn us,

but unhappiness made us brave, or do I mean cowardly,

and Kit and I talked as if we were already quite certain

you could no longer hear us, saying how easy you were

to love, but how difficult always to satisfy and relax—

how impossible to talk to, in fact, how expert with silence.

 

You breathed more easily by the time we were done,

although the thought you might have heard us after all,

and our words be settling into your soft brain like stones

onto the bed of a stream—that made our own breathing

tighter. Then the nurse looked in: Nothing will changehere for a while boys, and we ducked out like criminals.

 

I was ordering two large gins in the pub half a mile off

when my mobile rang. It was the hospital. You had died.

I put my drink down, then thought again and finished it.

Five minutes later we were back at the door of your room

wondering whether to knock. Would everything we said

be written on your face, like the white cross on the heavens?

 

Of course not. It was written in us, where no one could find it

except ourselves. Your own face was wiped entirely clean—

and so, with your particular worries solved, and your sadness,

I could see more clearly than ever how like mine it was,

and therefore how my head will eventually look on the pillow

when the wall opens behind me, and I depart with my failings.

 

"
"







28 June 1914







Although an assassin has tried

and failed to blow him to pieces earlier this morning,

Archduke Ferdinand has let it be known

he will very soon complete his journey

as planned along the quay in Sarajevo.

 

For a moment, however,

he has paused to recover his composure

at the window of a private room in the Town Hall,

after finding the blood of his aide-de-camp

spattered over the manuscript of the speech

he was previously unable to complete.

 

And indeed,

the prospect of an Austrian brewery in the distance

is reassuring,

likewise the handsome bulk of the barracks

filled with several thousand soldiers of the fatherland.

 

This is how those who survive today will remember him:

 

a man thinking his thoughts

until his wife has finished her duties—

the Countess Chotek, with her pinched yet puddingy features,

to whom he will whisper shortly,

‘Sophie, live for our children’,

although she will not hear.

 

As for his own memories:

 

the Head of the local Tourist Bureau has now arrived

and taken it upon himself to suggest

the Archduke might be happy to recall the fact

that only last week he bagged his three thousandth stag.

 

Was this, the Head dares to enquire,

with the double-barrelled Mannlicher

made for him especially—

the same weapon he used to dispatch

two thousand one hundred and fifty game birds

in a single day,

and sixty boars in a hunt led by the Kaiser?

 

These are remarkable achievements

the Head continues,

on the same level as the improvement

the Archduke has suggested in the hunting of hare,

by which the beaters,

forming themselves into a wedge-shape,

squeeze those notoriously elusive creatures

towards a particular spot

where he can exceed the tally of every other gun.

 

In the silence that follows

it is not obvious whether the Archduke

has heard the question.

 

He has heard it.

 

He is more interested, however,

in what these questions bring to mind:

 

an almost infinite number of woodcock,

pigeon, quail, pheasant and partridge,

wild boars bristling flank to flank,

mallard and teal and geese

dangling from the antlers of stags,

layer and layer of rabbits

and other creatures that are mere vermin—

 

a haul that he predicts will increase

once the business of today has been completed.

"
"

General Petraeus, when the death-count of American troops

in Iraq was close to 3,800, said ‘The truth is you never do get

used to losses. There is a kind of bad news vessel with holes,

 

and sometimes it drains, then it fills up, then it empties again’—

leaving, in this particular case, the residue of a long story

involving one soldier who, in the course of his street patrol,

 

tweaked the antenna on the TV in a bar hoping for baseball,

but found instead the snowy picture of men in a circle talking,

all apparently angry and perhaps Jihadists. They turned out to be

 

reciting poetry. ‘My life’, said the interpreter, ‘is like a bag of flour

thrown through wind into empty thorn bushes’. Then ‘No, no’, he said,

correcting himself. ‘Like dust in the wind. Like a hopeless man.’

"
"

I am downstairs early

looking for something to do

 

when I find my father on his knees

at the fireplace in the sitting-room

sweeping ash

from around and beneath the grate

with the soft brown hand-brush

he keeps especially for this.

 

Has he been here all night

waiting to catch me out?

So far as I can tell

I have done nothing wrong.

 

I think so again

when he calls my name

without turning round;

 

he must have seen me

with the eyes in the back of his head.

 

‘What’s the matter old boy?

Couldn’t sleep?’

 

His voice is kinder than I expect,

as though he knows

we have in common a sadness

I do not feel yet.

 

I skate towards him in my grey socks

over the polished boards of the sitting-room,

 

negotiating the rugs

with their patterns of almost-dragons.

 

He still does not turn round.

 

He is concentrating now

on arranging a stack of kindling

on crumpled newspaper in the fire basket,

 

pressing small lumps of coal

carefully between the sticks

as though he is decorating a cake.

 

Then he spurts a match,

and chucks it on any old how,

 

before spreading a fresh sheet of newspaper

over the whole mouth of the fireplace

to make the flames take hold.

 

Why this fresh sheet

does not also catch alight

I cannot think.

 

The flames are very close.

 

I can see them

and hear them raging

through yesterday’s cartoon of President Kennedy

 

and President Khrushchev

racing towards each other in their motorcars

both shouting

I’m sure he’s going to stop first!

 

But there’s no need to worry.

Everything

is just as my father wants it to be,

and in due time,

when the fire is burning nicely,

he whisks the newspaper clear,

 

folds it under his arm,

 

and picks up the dustpan

with the debris of the night before.

 

Has he just spoken to me again?

I do not think so. I

do not know.

I was thinking how neat he is.

I was asking myself:

will I be like this? How will I manage?

 

After that he chooses a log

from the wicker wood-basket

to balance on the coals,

and admires his handiwork.

 

When the time comes to follow him,

glide, glide over the polished floor,

he leads the way to the dustbins.

 

A breath of ash

pours continuously over his shoulder

from the pan he carries before him

like a man bearing a gift

in a picture of a man bearing a gift.

"
"

In my little room, the emperor removes

his robe and we chat

about the mechanics of winning

an election.

“I came, I saw, I conquered,” he says.

When the moon comes out above the

dilapidated warehouse, he asks me

the profundity of going to the moon

and back again to the same ghetto room.

 

If it pleases your majesty, I say,

the gods make the ghettos.

“I am King,” says the emperor, “I shall

have no gods.”

And he shakes, nearly spilling his oolong tea.

When he has calmed down enough, I

drop two lumps of sugar into his cup.

He marvels at my calculus book and integration

theory and digital watch.

“Had I one of those,” he says, “I would have timed

my crossing of the Rubicon at eighteen,

and what barbarian woman would not have given herself

for that!”

 

He yawns imperially over

my utensils, books, and cot

and asks me to cross the Rubicon with him.

And I nod while doing tax equations for his majesty

because the hour is late.

He is delighted with the hot chocolate

that I make on a hot plate

and, after making a rough estimate of the roaches

on the wall, he sleeps on my cot

as any sovereign would.

 

I rattle my typewriter like a machine-

gun all night, partly because it is my

habit, and partly to protect my friend,

the emperor. For though he has crossed

the Rubicon with the bravest of men,

he has yet to sleep a single night

in the ghetto.

"
"

Let them sleep and dream the dream of lobsters;

I am likewise at peace in my little cottage

trying to become Mr. Five Willows.

 

I figure a crabapple is useful to no one but itself,

but my safety depends on having no place where death can enter

and not acting on every rustling of the smallest branch.

 

My abode is at the bank of a river, a river that comes

out of the marsh where the river merchant’s wife

has pined for her departed husband for the last 300 years.

 

Beetles fight on a dung heap; that’s the essence of war.

With axes and arrows, a superior force approaches my door;

let them knock lightly, so as not to disturb the

 

bird in the cage, which I am coaxing to sing,

while the candle burns to illumine the midnight lore

whose frayed texts drive me to the brink of insanity.

 

Let them all sleep and dream that the God of War

has brought them riches in the shape of gold nuggets

only to find in the morning

an empty store.

 

You can be in my dreams

if I can be in yours. In any case,

let the Chinese mafia sleep tonight

so I can be at peace

 

and in the morning, open wide my door.

"
"

The goldfish in my bowl

turns into a carp each night.

Swimming in circles in the day,

regal, admired by emperors,

but each night, while I sleep,

it turns into silver, a dagger

cold and sharp, couched at one spot,

enough to frighten cats.

 

The rest of the furniture

squats in the cold and dark,

complains of being a lone man’s

furnishings, and plots a revolt.

I can hear myself snore, but not

their infidelity. Sometimes I wake

with a start; silently they move back

into their places.

 

I have been unpopular with myself,

pacing in my small, square room.

But my uncle said, “Even in a palace,

you can but sleep in one room.”

With this I become humble as a simple

preacher, saying, “I have no powers;

they emanate from God.”

With this I sleep soundly,

 

Fish or no fish, dagger or no dagger.

When I wake, my fish is gold,

it pleases me with a trail of bubbles.

My furniture has been loyal all night,

waiting to provide me comfort.

There was no conspiracy against a poor man.

With this I consider myself king.

"
"

Measure two handfuls for a prosperous man.

Place in pot and wash by rubbing palms together

as if you can’t quite get yourself to pray, or

by squeezing it in one fist. Wash

several times to get rid of the cloudy water;

when you are too high in Heaven, looking down

at the clouds, you can’t see what’s precious below.

Rinse with cold water and keep enough so that

it will barely cover your hand placed on the rice.

Don’t use hot water, there are metallic diseases

colliding in it. This method of measuring water will work

regardless of the size of the pot; if the pot is large,

use both hands palms down as if to pat your own belly.

Now place on high heat without cover and cook

until the water has been boiled away except in craters

resembling those of the moon, important

in ancient times for growing rice. Now place lid on top

and reduce heat to medium, go read your newspaper

until you get to the comics, then come back and turn it down to low.

The heat has been gradually traveling from the outside

to the inside of the rice, giving it texture;

a similar thing happens with people, I suppose.

 

Go back to your newspaper, finish the comics, and read

the financial page. Now the rice is done, but before

you eat, consider the peasant who arcs in leech-infested

paddies and who carefully plants the rice seedlings

one by one; on this night, you are eating better than he.

If you still don’t know how to cook rice, buy a Japanese

automatic rice cooker; it makes perfect rice every time!

"
"

I don’t recall when I first understood

why you stiffen at the roar of low flying jets—

 

Did you tell me, Mother, or did I just know?

When you refused to show me the caves like eyes

in the hills behind Bah-chan’s house—

 

Did I only dream it, how when the sirens began the trains stopped

dead in their tracks, unleashing a stream of thousands to rush

blind and headlong toward those sheltering hills—

 

The damp press of strange bodies in darkness

rank with the stench of war’s leavings,

only imagine a young girl’s cries drowned in the tumult,

urgent groping of unseen hands—

 

the bombs raining d0wn on Yokohama Harbor all through

the night, hothouse blooms crackling in a seething sky,

then hissing into a boiling sea—

 

Was it a millennium that passed before the sirens ceased their wailing,

only to be taken up again by the dogs and the dying?

 

But you talk of none of this today. We walk slowly,

saying little, as if less said will keep the heat at bay.

The air is wet, heavy with summer smells

carried aloft on the hypnotic drone of cicadas.

 

You show me where as a girl you played in other summers,

catching kabuto beetles and dragonflies in bamboo cages.

 

What must go through you when we pass them

at a distance, those black maws yawning out of the hillside,

exhaling the unspeakable?

"
"

When Emperor Hirohito announced

Japan’s defeat over national radio,

his divinity was broken, fell away

and settled in fine gold dust at his feet.

 

His people understood the gravity

of the occasion—a god does not speak

over the airwaves with a human voice,

ordinary and flecked with static. A god

does not speak in the common voice

of the earthbound, thick with shame.

 

At the station, my mother, a schoolgirl,

looked on as men in uniform lurched

from the platform into the path

of incoming trains, their slack bodies

landing on the tracks without sound.

"
"

Near dusk I find her in a newly mown field, lying still

and face down in the coarse stubble. Her arms

 

are splayed out on either side of her body, palms open

and turned upward like two lilies, the slender fingers

 

gently curling, as if holding onto something. Her legs

are drawn up underneath her, as if she fell asleep there

 

on her knees, perhaps while praying, perhaps intoxicated

by the sweet liquid odor of sheared grass.

 

Her small ankles, white and unscarred, are crossed

one on top of the other, as if arranged so in ritual fashion.

 

Her feet are bare. I cannot see her face, turned

toward the ground as it is,

 

but her long black hair is lovelier than I remember it,

spilling across her back and down onto the felled stalks

 

like a pour of glossy tar. Her flesh is smooth

and cool, slightly resistant to my touch.

 

I begin to look around me for something with which

to carry her back—carry her back, I hear myself say,

 

as if the words spoken aloud, even in a dream,

will somehow make it possible.

 

I am alone in a field, at dusk, the light leaving

the way it has to, leaking away the way it has to

 

behind a ridge of swiftly blackening hills. I lie down

on the ground beside my mother under falling darkness

 

and draw my coat over our bodies. We sleep there like that.

 

"
"

Near the end of my searching

               I came to a door.

 

Entering, I found the story

               of her life, laid out like a cake

 

on an ebony table, as if waiting there

               for the lost bride—pages flat

 

and placid, blank as a lake

               asleep in winter. Hoping

 

for answers, some knowledge of her,

               perhaps—I’m not sure what—

 

I placed my palm upon the surface.

 

It sank through and disappeared

               beneath a cloud of snowy powder.

 

"
"

Stepping crow. Moon at half mast.

Dawn horse, horse, blanket and mule.

The fool knows something you don’t.

 

Stepping crow. Both feet in the boat.

Books stacked up, and nowhere to store ’em.

Decorum is spontaneous order.

 

Stepping crow. Gone north of the Border.

Magic in motion and magic at rest.

Only divest, no need to announce it.

 

Stepping crow. Locked in from the outset.

Feet in the boat and we’re already rowing.

I don’t like thinking, I like already knowing.

 

Stepping crow. Take hammer to coin.

Anvil to anvil, and figure to ground.

Hateful, the sound of recriminations.

 

Stepping crow. Uncountable Haitians.

Hospital, barracks; Harvard and prison.

Give the rhythm what it wants. And the people.

 

Stepping crow. Horace primeval.

Wrist-deep in sheep’s guts, breaking the set.

But memory is the better poet.

 

Stepping crow. Clogged is the conduit.

Explain and explain, you try and get on with it:

You just give ’em something to fight with.

 

Stepping crow. Christian Enlightenment.

A bubble, sluggish, in a carpenter’s level.

But bad’s not the Devil.  Bad can be good.

 

Stepping crow. They misunderstood.

Nobody rightly prefers a surprise.

The wise like looking forward.

 

Stepping crow. Don’t try to ignore it:

The strain in the closet and school letting out.

I doubt it’ll ever be casual.

 

Stepping crow. I just happen to know.

I don’t happen to trust the self I’m serving.

This pleasure’s a lie, unless it’s permanent.

 

Stepping crow. And thirteenth tercet.

The place where the Wall tunnels into the sea.

It’s not not me you’re aiming at.

 

Stepping crow. Gotta add and subtract.

I see now we have no choice but to leave

The brutal honesty to the brutes.

 

Stepping crow. I know it’s no use.

The Sport of Kings and the Book of Love.

They’re not above irregular perquisites.

 

Stepping crow. Can never be sure of it.

Blood orange, orange; persimmon and onion;

And women are young men too …

 

Stepping crow. Oh, say it ain’t so.

A fist full of leaves and another of arrows:

I’m setting the trap where the passage narrows.

"
"

The ampalaya, no matter how bitter,

Is sweet to those who like it.

The hardest person to awaken

Is a lover feigning sleep.

 

The basketball held underwater

Wants violently to come up.

Easily split asunder is that

Which never was united.

 

The water is cold at first, for it

Takes time to heat the pipe.

The kids run away from home, only to

Sit through endless classes.

 

You take the battery out of a watch,

You turn it into a liar.

You strip the sheet off a drinking straw

And stab it into the scalp.

 

The basketball held underwater

Wants violently to come up.

The one who reads the sutra is not

The one who knows what is said.

 

My life is as unchanging

As the surface of the moon.

And I give you the same reason:

I have no atmosphere.

 

El hacha ya está puesta

A la raíz de los árboles,

Y todo árbol que no produzca buen fruto

Is hewn down and cast into the fire.

 

You take a rose by the throat.

How much blood comes out your hand

Is how recklessly you took hold,

Is how shamelessly.

 

Who wants to be great or holy

Has no lust for peace.

For peace is a thread only spools on a thing

That’s good for nothing else.

 

"
"

Has it coming, the pest. Gets irritated, the stuck up. Gets approval, the dimpled. Gets cold, the talk.


 


The sidewalk separates from the curb. Frogs peek out there. There are passages there, channels.


 


Gardens, orderly, get respect; no one hurts them. Only animals, insects, beings without comprehension.


 


A house on a corner lot, good to look up at from the corner, compels. Branches of live oak reach across the way. There must be acorns, black, green, green with earth yellow.


 


The wind cools the walker. There is nothing to stop the wind up. It finds every walker in its path, cools him, cools her.


 


Director must direct and make decisions. Buildings on the edges of developments look out over edges. The other world never nearer.


 


Between towns, roads are lonely. Lonely, too, who cannot bear being lied to. The angry become less intelligent. Do and undo, the day is long enough.


 


Liars do not think they are lying; that’s how they do it. The nut gives way to the teeth; the teeth crush it.


 


Smashed frog in the parking lot turns colors, becomes flat, extends its fingers, does not come back to life when it rains, yet disappears.


 


Wonderfully, beliefs antedate evidence. Wonderfully, people seldom believe a thing unless they already wanted it.


 


Many cry when signaled, not pursuant to cognition. What is offered as proof is suspect.


 


Summer makes strategic. Strategy is a pleasure. Whatever people say, to obey, of itself, does not hurt.


 


Stray feline must lie in shade, under tree, distrust her well-wisher first. Grackle must shelter under car, direct its thirsty attention to the water there.


 


Cut of meat must lose its color on the fire, exchange it, be seasoned. To be accused, rightly or wrongly, feels the same.


 


Old man must speak against his own best interests, for he cannot swallow his complaints, not all of them. Glassware touching glassware gets chipped, broken into triangles, in the move.


 


Vital sheet of paper must sometimes be lost. Papers are many. The thing learned at length, the memorized rigmarole, must fade from memory, in time.


 


The kind word given unexpectedly is good. The hearer must be relieved. The thought that nothing can ever go right again must depart for a time.


 


The light must change. The waiting person wait longer. The walker must step out of the summer heat wet to the hair roots, the shirt wet.


 


The sky is the same but seems grander where no buildings are. Colored clouds are remarked; white ones less.


 


One’s looks, one’s skin color matter less if money has its feet in it. The hated one, the cheated many, are the poor.


 


Lean grackle must stalk a branch, mouth open like scissors. Striped raptors, wings in fixed positions, must kite, must circle.


 


Beautiful Soul wants a world in which he or she has no place. Godspeed, sweet intent. Love will creep where it cannot go.


 


Stick-figure reptiles, black, must cross the sidewalk by the pool, dartingly. They weigh one paperclip.


 


Beauty enslaves on contact. Better have it than hear of it. Sweet and cunningly seldom meet.


 


In dragging a bamboo tree, one must snatch it by the eyebrows. The rusty sword and the empty purse plead performance of covenants.


 


Even Graceful must sometimes, in putting on her coat, sweep everything off the table and into the floor. If many strike on an anvil, they must in meter.


 


He, only, pursues honesty honestly, who has destroyed any possibility of good repute. Whether you boil snow or pound it, you can only have water out of it.


 


Cities must have boulevards, vast channels not possible or dangerous to cross. There must be holes in the decomposing concrete, paint invisible at sunrise and sunset, guardrails, median strips, shrines.


 


The student must wait to do the assignment, wait beyond the advisable point, stay up against a deadline. Must turn in a paper never read, not by the writer, not by the friend.


 


Must muster, thunder, one or two times in a life, a sound to frighten the unfrightenable. Must pour, from the sky, rarely, chips and balls and coins and smooth clusters of partly white, partly clear ice.


 


Some believe, helplessly. Others, less. Some count, tabulate, helplessly. They check calendars. They can’t shake it.


 


Winter travels, hides, shelters. It pursues the lightly dressed into buildings during summer. It lies in wait in restaurants, miscalculates.


 


The pill and its coating, obnoxious to the child, are welcome enough to the grown swallower. First deserve and then desire. Blow first and sip afterwards.


 


The wise let it go a great deal. Sorrow is wondrously clinging; clouds glide. The friend who comes apologizing and promising must be received. He is sorry and not sorry and sorry.


 


Courage comes up. Sacrifice, oftener. The disintegrating parking lot is witness to the exchange. Drugs are traded, caresses.


 


The dog in its heavy coat must lie, half dead, on the porch. Eyes like a bear, tongue like a lion, lethargy.


 


One must consciously retire. Comes off a train none but was on it. The heirloom ring, wrong-gendered, trash, gets rescued.


 


When the spirit of praising is upon him, a man will judge linen by candlelight. Burr oaks yield fewer fruit, but bigger, shag-capped.


 


One must consciously retire. A helve must fit its ax head. Most laugh before understanding. Fame is best.


 

"
"

Mirror, mirror on the wall

show me in succession all

my faces, that I may view

and choose which I would like as true.

 

Teach me skill to disguise

what’s not pleasing to the eyes,

with faith, that life obeys the rules,

in man or God or football pools.

 

Always keep me well content

to decorate attitude and event

so that somehow behind the scene

I may believe my actions mean;

 

that one can exercise control

in playing out a chosen role;

rub clouded glass and then,

at will, write self on it again.

 

But if, in some unlucky glance,

I should glimpse naked circumstance

in all its nowhere-going-to,

may you crack before I do.

"
"

I remember them saying,

these poems, their something

for someone at sometime

for me too, at one time.

 

That got in the way;

so I sent them away

back into history—

just temporarily.

 

They won’t come back now.

I can’t remember how

the words spoke, or what

they said,

except:

We are all dead

"
"







           For the centenary of Girton College







i hyphen (Gk. together, in one)

a short dash or line used to connect

two words together as a compound

1869-

1969

to connect Chapel Wing and Library.

But also: to divide

for etymological or other purpose.

A gap in stone makes actual

the paradox of a centenary.

“It was a hyphen connecting different races.”

and to the library

“a bridge for migrations”.

In search of an etymology

                                             for compound lives,

this architecture,

                              an exercise in paleography

(Victorian Gothic)

                                asserts the same intention.

Portraits busts and books

                                             the “context in which we occur”

that teaches us our meaning,

                                                  ignore the lacunae

of a century

                      in their state-

ment of our need to hyphenate.

"
"







                         homage to William Empson







It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,

Landing every poem like a fish.

Unhuman forms must not assert their roles.

 

Glittering scales require the deadly tolls

Of net and knife. Scales fall to relish.

It is the sense, it is the sense, controls.

 

Yet languages are apt to miss on souls

If reason only guts them. Applying the wish,

Unhuman forms must not assert their roles,

 

Ignores the fact that poems have two poles

That must be opposite. Hard then to finish

It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,

 

Without a sense of lining up for doles

From other kitchens that give us the garnish:

Unhuman forms must not assert their roles.

 

And this (forgive me) is like carrying coals

To Sheffield. Irrelevance betrays a formal anguish.

It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,

“Unhuman forms must not assert their roles”.

"
"

All day we packed boxes.

We read birth and death certificates.

The yellowed telegrams that announced

our births, the cards of congratulations

and condolences, the deeds and debts,

love letters, valentines with a heart

ripped out, the obituaries.

We opened the divorce decree,

a terrible document of division and subtraction.

We leafed through scrapbooks:

corsages, matchbooks, programs to the ballet,

racetrack, theatre—joy and frivolity

parceled in one volume—

painstakingly arranged, preserved

and pasted with crusted glue.

We sat in the room in which the beloved

had departed. We remembered her yellow hair

and her mind free of paradox.

We sat together side by side

on the empty floor and did not speak.

There were no words

between us other than the essence

of the words from the correspondences,

our inheritance—plain speak,

bereft of poetry.

"
"

At the high school football game, the boys

stroke their new muscles, the girls sweeten their lips

with gloss that smells of bubblegum, candy cane,

or cinnamon. In pleated cheerleader skirts

they walk home with each other, practicing yells,

their long bare legs forming in the dark.

Under the arched field lights a girl

in a velvet prom dress stands near the chainlink,

a cone of roses held between her breasts.

Her lanky father, in a corduroy suit, leans

against the fence. While they talk, she slips a foot

in and out of a new white pump, fingers the weave

of her French braid, the glittering earrings.

They could be a couple on their first date, she,

a little shy, he, trying to impress her

with his casual stance. This is the moment

when she learns what she will love: a warm night,

the feel of nylon between her thighs, the fine hairs

on her arms lifting when a breeze

sifts in through the bleachers, cars

igniting their engines, a man bending over her,

smelling the flowers pressed against her neck.

"
"

You will leave your home:

nothing will hold you.

You will wear dresses of gold; skins

of silver, copper, and bronze.

The sky above you will shift in meaning

each time you think you understand.

You will spend a lifetime chipping away layers

of flesh. The shadow of your scales

will always remain. You will be marked

by sulphur and salt.

You will bathe endlessly in clear streams and fail

to rid yourself of that scent.

Your feet will never be your own.

Stone will be your path.

Storms will follow in your wake,

destroying all those who take you in.

You will desert your children

kill your lovers and devour their flesh.

You will love no one

but the wind and ache of your bones.

Neither will love you in return.

With age, your hair will grow matted and dull,

your skin will gape and hang in long folds,

your eyes will cease to shine.

But nothing will be enough.

The sea will never take you back.

"
"

Of course now children take it for granted but once

we watched boxes on a conveyor belt, sliding by,

magically filled and closed, packed and wrapped.

We couldn't get enough of it, running alongside the machine.

In kindergarten Miss Haynes walked our class down

Stuyvesant Avenue, then up Prospect Street

to the hot dog factory. Only the girls got to go

as the boys were too wild.

We stood in line, wiggling with excitement as the man

talked about how they made hot dogs, then he handed us

one, and Jan dropped hers, so I broke mine in half.

This was the happiest day of our lives,

children whose mothers didn't drive, and had nowhere

to go but school and home, to be taken to that street

to watch the glittering steel and shining rubber belts moving,

moving meats, readymade.  I wish I could talk with Jan,

recalling the miracle and thrill of the hot dog factory,

when she was alive, before it all stopped—

bright lights, glistening motors, spinning wheels.

 

"
"

The cat has the chance to make the sunlight

Beautiful, to stop it and turn it immediately

Into black fur and motion, to take it

As shifting branch and brown feather

Into the back of the brain forever.

The cardinal has flown the sun in red

Through the oak forest to the lawn.

The finch has caught it in yellow

And taken it among the thorns. By the spider

It has been bound tightly and tied

In an eight-stringed knot.

The sun has been intercepted in its one

Basic state and changed to a million varieties

Of green stick and tassel. It has been broken

Into pieces by glass rings, by mist

Over the river. Its heat

Has been given the board fence for body,

The desert rock for fact. On winter hills

It has been laid down in white like a martyr.

This afternoon we could spread gold scarves

Clear across the field and say in truth,

""Sun you are silk.""

Imagine the sun totally isolated,

Its brightness shot in continuous streaks straight out

Into the black, never arrested,

Never once being made light.

Someone should take note

Of how the earth has saved the sun from oblivion.

"
"

I'd search for Philippines in History class.

The index named one page, moved on to Pierce.The Making of America marched past

my enigmatic father's place of birth.

The week he died some man we didn't know

called up. This is his brother, one more shock,phoning for him. ""He died three days ago.""

The leaden black receiver did not talk.

My uncle never gave his name or town,

we never heard from him. Was it a dream?

The earpiece roar dissolved to crackling sounds,

a dial tone erased the Philippines.

And yet my world grows huge with maps, crisscrossed,

my History alive with all I've lost.

"
"

Not, in the saying of you, are you

said. Baffled and like a root

stopped by a stone you turn back questioning

the tree you feed. But what the leaves hear

is not what the roots ask. Inexhaustibly,

being at one time what was to be said

and at another time what has been said

the saying of you remains the living of you

never to be said. But, enduring,

you change with the change that changes

and yet are not of the changing of any of you.

Ever yourself, you are always about

to be yourself in something else ever with me.

"
"

For the earth has spoken,

to you, her magma Creole.

Full-throated syllables, up-

rising from deep down,

an honest elocution —

rudimentary sound: guttural

nouns, forthright, strong,

the rumbled conviction of verbs

unfettered by reticence

as the first poetry of creation.

A secret has passed between you

so wonderfully terrible,

it laid your cities prostrate,

raptured your citizenry.

Now, we look to your remnant

courtesy cable TV

and garble theories thinking

ourselves saved.

Only the wise among us pin

our ears to the ground,

listening in hope of catching

even a half syllable

of the language forming

like a new world on your tongue.

"
"

when i look at my life

i feel like bursting into tears

marriage

and mental illness

vintage washed

michael jackson graphic

spiritual disco grieving ritual

sell your body

to your horse-eyed past

little fictions

somebody got to sing

and somebody

got to play the squaw

last time i saw him

last time i saw my honey

buried your dead

lack of afro

exit wounds

cut off whole limbs

of generational desire

the death of cleopatra

hell or high water

get some fucking

love in your life girl

ghost chant

you’ve got to die

if you want to live

amidst and against 

the things we are

rubbed into the cloth

wrapped around their faces

now white men

are black men too

the ways

we can’t say no

i call you queen

not as a term of endearment

but as a reminder

our histories meet

on the inside

we all be black moses

slave for the river

same river twice

sometimes

have to emphasize

the brown part

hey there beautiful brown girl

we don't usually change

until things are so painful

that we must

 

"
"

I am totally enamored of every person passing in this unseasonably warm mid-March evening near 39th and Park

 

The young women, of course, with their lives in front of them, and the young men too, just standing here as I am, checking it out, hanging out, talking

 

But everyone here, every age, every type, is beautiful, the moment, somehow, the weather, has made them all real and for this moment, before it turns to night, they're all fantastic

 

The light is such that I can see everyone and can imagine what they are imagining for the night ahead, what dreams, what fulfilled fantasies of togetherness

 

And the two guys who were here a moment ago, paused, have moved on, and the light is deepening, every moment or so, actually falling into a deeper stupor, which is night

 

But if I look south I still see the pink flush of desire there at the bottom, the southness of all our lives, and it's okay that it's darkening here, people accept it as they concoct plans for tonight, Thursday

 

Soon I'll have to go too, lose this spot, this moment, but some we've met and some experience we had somewhere else is becoming ever more important

 

"
"

What if I ate too much food     there being

Not enough money    immigranty

And save all the ketchup

                                  packets    George

Carlin record on the record player saying

how many ways you can curse and they

are all funny   (small brown bird with a black

neck and a beak full of fluff for a nest)

 

       The old joke: “How many feet

do you have?”     Instead of

“How tall are you?”

 

This looks like joy     a joke

who looked at you and laughed

 

Look at the map upside down    so that south

Is north and north is south

          it’s the other

way around because it’s the commonly agreed to

thing    (visual language of the colonizer) or

snowful awful     tearful wishful

"
"

Imaginary book

on Imaginary paper

in Imaginary hands

 

Imaginary dance

on Imaginary floor

in Imaginary lands

 

Imaginary phone

and Imaginary car

 

Imaginary raising

of Imaginary bar

 

Imaginary kid

Imaginary tree

Imaginary you

makes Imaginary three

 

Imaginary soul

Imaginary death

Imaginary line

Imaginary breath

 

Imaginary neighbors

with Imaginary friends

Imaginary road

with Imaginary bends

 

Imaginary pot

Imaginary beer

Imaginary death

Imaginary fear

 

Imaginary love

that stops you dead

Imaginary bullet

of Imaginary lead

 

Imaginary day

and Imaginary night

Imaginary wind

Imaginary kite

 

Imaginary heat

and Imaginary ice

Imaginary toppings

on Imaginary slice

 

Imaginary Emerson

meet Imaginary Poe

Imaginary poet

Imaginary crow

 

 

1-9-16 

 

"
"

Many nights while walking home 

after work, from downtown to 

an apartment below a market, 

I’d think of Alfred Espinas:

“We do not get together to die,

but to live and to improve life.”

Sudden changes of weather and

contagious diseases nearly broke

the spirits of many friends that

winter, but charmingly we made 

habits of dancing and sharing

meals in our cramped rooms.

Our landlords were thieves and

our bosses were pessimists, yet

we dreamed of a new phase of

civilization, one of kindness and

goodwill. “We need communes,”

Oscar exclaimed. Silvia argued,

“But islands are corpses, let’s think

instead of syndicates.” Mondays 

we’d return to dirty dishes, copy

machines, and dull knives, and 

we spent the next three centuries

doing what we were paid to do.

 

"
"

and who are you now       

       in this different blue space without pain

   remarking on chemtrails and snowmelt,   misreading the “sea”

whose letters cease to arrive

 

     remain transfixed in midflight       turbulent coasts

aloft as a principle of life--

 

        count invisible clams under nameless sands

   cut apostrophes into the air     announcements

 send far-flung greetings to strangers for days 

          keep the magma enigma at bay        daily joys

    

        effaced vaporous pale generous smoke rising

 

      so cling to the dark hand inside you

  its basalt fingers, rounded

 

"
"

Family, lover, colleague. Notions, veneers, nation. Teeth of no health insurance.

 

A boom can be a microphone affixed to a pole and not an explosion.

 

Shadows, we sweep at them constantly and on the table is chocolate, newspapers, commentary, and vastly different pay stubs.

 

 

 

 

I lean in to you and wish to love you perfectly.

 

Suffer, tumble, strive, the right shoes, and vacation.

 

At the table, conference and always pretty, the fixed.

 

Shimmer of repulsion or fairy tale of cleavage.

 

 

 

 

I count pleasures like cream, sipping, speaking. I like fashion as well.

 

 

All the hymns you and I know as his headboard knocks against our wall, the slap when he coughs, our neighbor.

 

 

 

 

The most racist of all positions at the staff meeting is to tell us about your shocking talent if there is a most. A prayer dangles over this bitter.

 

 

 

 

Looping coves of sympathy. How to history.

 

 

 

 

My flat speech in variously adopted professional tones.

 

Merger of you and me and take whatever you want.

 

Her beautiful poetry face. His intellectual arms.

 

I worry about the ferocious place in you while framing it.

 

 

 

 

A person as diversion, a thing beautiful, a small green-blue egg in a spring next and now the field is gendered.

 

 

 

 

 

Have you seen the moment of last light? It means something to me.

 

 

 

 

 

Assuming my gender qualifies your hearing and therefore my speech, you overlap words with mine in what appears to be a neutral manner but your speech acts as solvent.

 

 

 

 

 

Down the hall, high heels as metronome, watched.

 

Out of our bodies comes speech as clouds, flag, windsock, bandage.

 

 

 

Dear—

You could make more money if you wanted to. Such as a day of beauty, persuasive levels of caring. For example: doing both brow and lip.

 

 

 

Are you spending or quiet?

 

 

 

 

Let’s go to lunch would mean exchanging speech and then carrying warm food in plastic bags.

 

 

 

 

Coherence as my mother sleeps after a complicated surgery.

 

And if I were, would you be generous with me as well?

 

 

 

 

 

Race ran the organization which one.

 

We socialize in this real estate of gerrymandered potlucks.

 

I think there exists silence as a legitimate response and I will say that now.

 

 

 

The caring for our souls by old black women in the narrative of a college president, passing. Excuse me for not knowing passing.

 

You remember but only after the spine is broken.

 

 

 

 

Something in chemistry called suspension equals your ghosts caught in my air.

 

 

 

 

The Bronx is horning was a line they wrote where I was educated, teaching.

 

 

 

 

Response to migration: the pullback of the form remains as a hum, a tongue.

 

 

 

"
"

As I leave for work she holds out her arms, and I

bend to lift her . . . always heavier than I remember,

because in my mind she is still that seedling bough

I used to cradle in one elbow. Her hug is honest,

fierce, forgiving. I think of Oregon's coastal pines,

wind-bent even on quiet days; they've grown in ways

the Pacific breeze has blown them all their lives.

And how will my daughter grow? Last night, I dreamed

of a mid-ocean gale, a howl among writhing waterspouts;

I don't know what it meant, or if it's still distant,

or already here. I know only how I hug my daughter,

my arms grown taut with the thought of that wind.

"
"

In her last notes, when her hand began

to tremble, my mother tried to teach it

 

the penmanship she was known for,

how to make the slanted stems

 

of the p's and d's, the descending

roundness of the capital m's, the long

 

loops of the f's crossed at the center,

sending it back again and again

 

until each message was the same:

a record of her insistence that the hand

 

return her to the way she was before,

and of all the ways the hand had disobeyed.

 

"
"

Everyone burned coal in our neighborhood,

soft coal they called it from the mountains

of western Pennsylvania where my father

grew up and fled as soon as he could, where

my Welsh cousins dug it down in the dark.

 

The furnace it fed stood in the dank

basement, its many arms upraised

like Godzilla or some other monster.

It was my job to pull out clinkers

and carry them to the alley bin.

 

Mornings were chilly, frost on windows

etching magic landscapes.  I liked

to stand over the hot air registers

the warmth blowing up my skirts.

But the basement scared me at night.

 

The fire glowed like a red eye through

the furnace door and the clinkers fell

loud and the shadows came at me as

mice scampered.  The washing machine

was tame but the furnace was always hungry.

 

"
"

I would drive to your grave but your grave is the crash

the froth foam pebbles small rocks the sand smoothed

soothed each rising each leaving tide you lie in the ocean

the water in the waves your home the stern the back

the wake of a boat those curled white lines of leaving

I would visit your grave but your grave is a single blue

afternoon of passing isles the green and granite shores

I would come to your grave but your grave is the fire

oh mother it is cold tonight and I have no heart

for this burning for the fine sift of ash which is all

that comes back all that comes after I would visit

your house but your things are missing are missing

your touch as your eyes failed I brought you lights

and I would see again that brightness I would drive

to your grave but I am your grave your marker

oh mother I am your stone

 

"
"

For I have loved the blade with all my crippled

with all my awkward soul loved it for the shine

sheen for the ease and grace of doing what it was

made to do for I have loved the stubborn womb

its beloved intent have loved the hope and then

learned to love the lack for I have loved the water

the way it comes to me comes for me in all its

liquid mystery for I have loved what the water

loves its myriad vessels sky basin runnel channel

and vein for all it claims and contains for I have

loved its muscular flex its rise coil and fall so like

Leviathan's mighty desperate heart for I have loved

Leviathan for being only for being exactly

what god hated and what he made for being

water's own knife this wild unholy blade

 

"
"

I said love because it came closest said leave

because you did we do this peeling off each

from each each from suddenly other said

come back but meant don't go I said dead

and meant every one of those instances of

vanishment how the dead swim away from us

in time their tide their closed wooden boats

I said tide but tide was never right said tide

because we have no word for that kind of

unforgiving away I said tether when I meant

anchor when I meant stay but when I said stay

one thing I meant was against confusion

against yet another loss I meant two-faced

Janus January's god of fallen gates of trying

to look both ways and when I said farewell

I meant again don't go but it was too late I was

here in the hall this tunnel full of mirrors glass

and strange made-up faces and when I thought

funhouse I meant its opposite I meant this

rusty carnival town the men so sad they paint

their smiles in place they paint their faces

white paint their eyes wide and full of crying

 

"
"

That this is the morning in which nothing much

that the sky is still there and the water dresses

accordingly that only at night does the water rest

vanish from sight that the stars are too small too far

to register there that all our names too are writ

invisibly on water that abiding requires more hope

than I can possibly acquire that hope is not a thing

with feathers that hope is a thing with a fist a thin

crust sketched over oceans that hope is what despair

uses for bait come in hope says the water's fine

that hope is the blood with which you write letters

that start dear sea dear ocean stop asking so fucking

much that hope is a telegram delivered by men

in pairs men in uniform a telegram that says missing

stop that says once again presumed lost stop

 

"
"

One tiny tree frog

with big eyes

sings happily,

“Kokee! Kokee!”

His brother comes to bother.

Coquí doesn't push him.

Coquí doesn't bite him.

Coquí tells him,

“Kokee-Kee! Kokee-Kee!”

Two tiny tree frogs

with big eyes

sing happily,

“Kokee! Kokee!”

"
"

The dragonfly at rest on the doorbell—

too weak to ring and glad of it,

but well mannered and cautious,

thinking it best to observe us quietly

before flying in, and who knows if he will find

the way out? Cautious of traps, this one.

A winged cross, plain, the body straight

as a thermometer, the old glass kind

that could kill us with mercury if our teeth

did not respect its brittle body. Slim as an eel

but a solitary glider, a pilot without bombs

or weapons, and wings clear and small as a wish

to see over our heads, to see the whole picture.

And when our gaze grazes over it and moves on,

the dragonfly changes its clothes,

sheds its old skin, shriveled like laundry,

and steps forth, polished black, with two

circles buttoned like epaulettes taking the last space

at the edge of its eyes.

 

"
"

We dressed for church.  I had a white hat

and white gloves when I was fifteen, no joke.

You had to do that to show God you cared.

 

God's eyes were stained glass, and his voice

was pipe organ. He was immortal, invisible,

while my panty-hose itched and my atheist

 

father chewed his tongue and threatened to run

out the door but didn't for my mother's sake,

and she swallowed her fate, this marriage,

 

like a communion cracker, and my brain-

damaged brother lurched around the church

nursery, and my sweeter sister watched me

 

with huge brown eyes to see what I'd do next.

My God, why did I turn my eyes upward when

we were all there, then, in the flesh? I am so

 

sorry about God, sorry we fastened that word

to the sky. God's not even legal in Hebrew.

If you get the vowel caught between the two

 

consonants of your lips, it can carry you

dangerously up like a balloon over what you'd

give anything to be in the middle of, now.

 

"
"

I wore Grandma Liz's pearls

for play, a plastic strand long

enough to pool on the carpet

over my stubbed toes. When I pull

them over my head now, I smell

phantoms: cigarettes, Esteé

Lauder. I don't smoke or spritz

on perfume. I don't layer polyester

or perm my hair. I've slipped off

my wedding ring as she did, signed

divorce. What advice would she offer

for life between husbands? Wear redlipstick and always leave it behind.

 

"
"

Outside in the creek that feeds the lake

and never freezes, an otter slaps the water

with his paw to feel the current's pulse—Slip in, lie back. Slip in, lie back. He shuts

his eyes and obeys, knowing the layers

of hair and underfur will warm him while

he floats on a faith we wish could carry us.

 

The sound of his splashing fades, but not

his joy in being pushed, light as driftwood,

back to the mouth of the den I have seen

carved out beneath the roots of a fallen fir

now packed with snow and lined with leaves

that promise his sleep will be deep.

 

Because no dreams wait softly for me,

I open the woodstove and strike a match,

hold the bloom of the flame to kindling

that catches quick as my wish: To be that

slick body sliding into the lake that holds

the moon, bright portal to glide through

without so much as a shiver, no doubt

about where I'm going, how to get there.

"
"

The fish are drifting calmly in their tank

between the green reeds, lit by a white glow

that passes for the sun. Blindly, the blank

glass that holds them in displays their slow

progress from end to end, familiar rocks

set into the gravel, murmuring rows

of filters, a universe the flying fox

and glass cats, Congo tetras, bristle-nose

pleocostemus all take for granted. Yet

the platys, gold and red, persist in leaping

occasionally, as if they can't quite let

alone a possibility—of wings,

maybe, once they reach the air? They die

on the rug. We find them there, eyes open in surprise.

 

"
"

at the third floor window of the tenement,

the street looks shiny.

It has been washed and rinsed by rain.

Beyond the silver streaks of the streetcar tracks

a single streetlight stands

in a pool of wet light. It is night.

St. Louis. Nineteen forty-seven.

I have just come home from the orphanage

to stay.

Years later, I will be another person.

I will almost not remember this summerónot

at all. But for nowówith the streetlight

reflecting an aura on the wet sidewalk,

with dark behind me in the dirty

two rooms we call home,

for now, I see it all.

Tomorrow I will begin to try to forget.

But in this moment everything is clear:

who I am, where I am, and the clean place

that I have left behind.

As clear as the streetlight: how distinct

its limits in the vast dark and the rain.

"
"

We used to play, long before we bought real houses.

A roll of the dice could send a girl to jail.

The money was pink, blue, gold, as well as green,

and we could own a whole railroad

or speculate in hotels where others dreaded staying:

the cost was extortionary.

 

At last one person would own everything,

every teaspoon in the dining car, every spike

driven into the planks by immigrants,

every crooked mayor.

But then, with only the clothes on our backs,

we ran outside, laughing.

 

"
"

After my father died, my mother

and my sisters picked the shirt, the tie;

he had just the one suit.

I left them to it, I didn't

want to choose, I loved him

all those years. They took a shirt

from the closet, I don't remember

which one, I'm sure he had worn it

to church and hung it up again.

They held a tie against the cloth

of the shirt. They decided, finally.

It's like that. Things come down

to the pale blue or the white,

or some other. Someone buttoned it

over him, those buttons he had unbuttoned.

 

"
"

We walked at the edge of the sea, the dog,

still young then, running ahead of us.

 

Few people.  Gulls.  A flock of pelicans

circled beyond the swells, then closed

their wings and dropped head-long

into the dazzle of light and sea.  You clapped

your hands; the day grew brilliant.

 

Later we sat at a small table

with wine and food that tasted of the sea.

 

A perfect day, we said to one another,

so that even when the day ended

and the lights of houses among the hills

came on like a scattering of embers,

we watched it leave without regret.

 

That night, easing myself toward sleep,

I thought how blindly we stumble ahead

with such hope, a light flares briefly—Ah, Happiness!

then we turn and go on our way again.

 

But happiness, too, goes on its way,

and years from where we were, I lie awake

in the dark and suddenly it returns—

that day by the sea, that happiness,

 

though it is not the same happiness,

not the same darkness.

"
"

When one thing is becoming another, when writing is morphing, when the writing of an hour becomes the desire to write at all hours and into the night, fueled on caffeine or wine and desiring instruments of writing; typewriters, even a nib and ink well, and considering all the ways of stretching a space, digital or hard copy; hard copy, an ugly expression for printed matter, and for that matter, printed matter is efficient but lacks beauty. Page, a soft and elongated word; page, an extension at the end of my fingers; page, a screen that holds dreams and desires; the page of legal document that bind. The page is a promise. I read all sides, turning the page counterclockwise and turning the page over for what I may have missed.

Desire is a stick for scratching words into the dirt and for chiseling stone until the words become solid. The pen is a body, an anatomy, not an earthworm with indecipherable ends; the pen has a head and tail, and inky guts. And the brain of the pen belongs to the maker of marks.

later hours/another hour/late hours/early hours/happy hour/visiting hours.


All the elements of the dying hour surround my laptop, in the dying blades of cut grass and in the dying battery. Finches continue their making of a nest of twigs and grasses, but I know the nest is early paper, the raw ingredients and pulp. I know the world is a page turner, a paper globe, and I know that the birds are the great writers of the sky.

"
"

Some people like to relax

and kick back with their friends

just talking and having a drink

 

which is obviously

highly pleasurable.

 

Some people like to be entertained

by music or a movie;

some people like to make some jokes

with people they like,

maybe at a bar

or at someone’s house.

 

Some people like to lay around

with another person,

just touching,

 

or to prepare food,

alone or with others

while listening to music

that they feel a particular

affinity for.

 

But sometimes people like to thrust themselves

into the howling wind and snow,

arms tied behind their backs.

 

I prefer to open my mouth wide open knowing what will happen

if I’m just holding my mouth open,

 

ready to respond or yell or whatever seems appropriate.

 

You know, I keep my mouth at the ready to make a lot of noise.

 

And sometimes it becomes filled

with hard packed snow or with sand,

 

sand being more of a problem,

since, you know,

it won’t melt.

 

"
"

Drawn by ceremonial obligation

up from sleep I woke and stepped 

into the borrowed black robes

all ghost bureaucrats trained 

to redirect dreaming pretend 

we do not like to wear. I drove 

my black car to the stadium 

to sit on stage and be watched 

watching young expectant spirits 

one by one with dread certainty 

pass before me, clouded 

in their names. Then listened 

to no one in their speeches say 

you’re welcome for allowing 

us not to tell you it’s already 

too late to learn anything 

or defend whatever accidental 

instrument in us causes 

all these useless thoughts. 

Like if you walked for hours 

through the vast black avenues 

of those server farms all of us 

with our endless attention built,

you could almost feel the same 

peaceful disinterest as when 

your parents talking and smoking 

raised their heads for a moment 

to smile and tell you go back 

upstairs and read the book 

you love about myths that explain 

weather and death. Now it is 

almost June and they are finally 

the children they always were. 

So more precise than anyone 

has ever had to be, go forget

everything we told you

so you can fix what we kept

destroying by calling the future.

 

"
"

I was humbled when my boss mocked me

for calling from vacation

I’m broke again

until Friday

from my bed

I see the lights, I see

the party lights

it’s torture

a post-Fordist allegory?

I appropriated a corporate apology

and saved it

in case something happened

but my end date came

and my vacation days paid out

I bought pills

from the intern I’d hired

on my way out

by the seaport

I texted you

we made plans to drink

I like your poochie print workout clothes

the credit card you keep for emergencies

I bought a book

from Strand Annex

though the poetics

weren’t to my taste

later the author died

I was nervous

in those days

always in need

my dark heart, my secret

poetry, my drug-filler

cut into my life and love

that it and I may last

"
"

if you like let the body feel

all its own evolution

inside, opening flagella

& feathers & fingers

door by door, a ragged

 

neuron dangling like

a participle to

hear a bare sound

 

on the path, find

a red-eye-hole rabbit, fat

of the bulbous stalk pecked out

to the core so you can

 

bore back to the salamander you

once were straggling under the skin

grope toward the protozoa

snagging on the rise toward placental knowing

 

who developed eyes for you agape in open waters

 

the worm that made a kidney-like chamber burrows in

directing your heart leftward in nodal cascade, slow at your

hagfish spine who

 

will bury your bones

investigate a redwood rain or tap

the garnet of your heartwood, bark, put

your flat needles on dry ice to inquire

after your tree family, father or mother in the fairy-ring

next to you, find you

are most closely related to grass

your hexaploid breathing pores gently closing at night, when

did you begin your coexistence with flowering

plants from which arose the bee before the

African honey badger but after the dark

protoplanetary disk of dust grains

surrounding the sun become

the earth you

had no nouns, did you

 

"
"

When he called, there were 261 emotions

at play. I thought there were only wistfulness,

humiliation, and mere bitterness left, but lo,

I see now the brilliance in the numbers. 

Emotions 75 and 78 made me happy just to know

they existed. I felt less alone, more impervious. 

I was emboldened by the existence of 152. 

Though, how was I supposed to accept 9, 14, and 179?

We deserved better, distress and indigence aside. 

Something about 260 broke the spell inside me

and offered up a tiny shift: I opened my eyes in the fog

and tore off the surfaces of 261 and 4 with a great shout. 

"
"

Inside every world there is another world trying to get out,

and there is something in you that would like to discount this world. 

The stars could rise in darkness over heartbreaking coasts, 

and you would not know if you were ruining your life or beginning a real one. 

You could claim professional fondness for the world around you; 

the pictures would dissolve under the paint coming alive,

and you would only feel a phantom skip of the heart, absorbed so in the colors. 

Your disbelief is a later novel emerging in the long, long shadow of an earlier one—

is this the great world, which is whatever is the case?

The sustained helplessness you feel in the long emptiness of days is matched

by the new suspiciousness and wrath you wake to each morning. 

Isn’t this a relationship with your death, too, to fall in love with your inscrutable life?

Your teeth fill with cavities. There is always unearned happiness for some, 

and the criminal feeling of solitude. Always, everyone lies about his life. 

 

"
"

Perhaps you can tell children that the world is always a more beautiful place than you can suppose,


and then you release them into their future, the black row of trees in the distance. 


She died suddenly in midwinter, in the same bed in which her husband died years earlier; it still sagged on his side. Her second husband remained in Japan with his first family. 


She used to say, what my three girls do when they are on their own is unimaginable to me. 


My mother is the middle daughter, a garden of inaudible tunes. The four of them lived in a mean house in Seoul. 


One yellowing picture of my grandmother remains, and her face turns away from the camera, as the rabbit senses the hound; 


she was said to be a solitary eater, an inner thing. What did she promise the world that she wasn’t able to make good on? 


A child who abruptly feels the frontiers of experience assert themselves in her: at the funeral my mother cries so hard she can’t feel her hands for days, 


it explains how she scratches herself raw, meaningless. 


You have always believed these are your themes: fate, the negative pleasures of dipping oneself in acid. 


You think it will rescue you from your simplicity, remarks my mother from the doorway, but art is never the ace in the hole. 


I am not a stupid child. I am not even a child any longer, with her hesitant, then terrible certainty, that loss is tragic, not only pointless. 


When she is lonely, my mother cooks; and when she is happy, she knows to hide it. 

"
"

You hear the sun in the morning

through closed shutters. As you sleep

the early sky is colored

in fish scales, and you open your eyes

like a street

already lined with fruit. 

"
"

A lamb blinking over a patch of earth

does not know what you have done. Feed it, 

and it will eat from your hand

as if you wore the skin of a washed grape. 

"
"

Your husband is stretched out on the ground

as if he were listening for something. 

Ask him to come back to the table. 

Whatever was there is now here. 

"
"

We are not responsible for your lost or stolen relatives. 

We cannot guarantee your safety if you disobey our instructions. 

We do not endorse the causes or claims of people begging for handouts. 

We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone. 

Your ticket does not guarantee that we will honor your reservations. 

In order to facilitate our procedures, please limit your carrying on. 

Before taking off, please extinguish all smoldering resentments. 

If you cannot understand English, you will be moved out of the way. 

In the event of a loss, you’d better look out for yourself. 

Your insurance was cancelled because we can no longer handle

your frightful claims. Our handlers lost your luggage and we

are unable to find the key to your legal case. 

You were detained for interrogation because you fit the profile. 

You are not presumed to be innocent if the police 

have reason to suspect you are carrying a concealed wallet. 

It’s not our fault you were born wearing a gang color. 

It is not our obligation to inform you of your rights. 

Step aside, please, while our officer inspects your bad attitude. 

You have no rights we are bound to respect. 

Please remain calm, or we can’t be held responsible 

for what happens to you. 

"
"

I try not to cast too much shade.

Sin would be

to use the excuse

of her growth in my womb,

to imagine her as a limb of myself.

She is her own tree,

late-winter’s indomitable shoot.

She takes cupfuls of sun.

I stand well clear

as the branches stretch

like flutes playing allegros.

Not for anything

would I poison her

with an act of possession,

conceal her from the woodsman

whose task is to make room for all.

"
"







'Life passes through places.'

–P.J. Duffy, Landscapes of South Ulster

Patrick Farrell, of Lackagh, who was able to mow one acre and one rood Irish in a day. Tom Gallagher, Cornamucklagh, could walk 50 Irish miles in one day. Patrick Mulligan, Cremartin, was a great oarsman. Tommy Atkinson, Lismagunshin, was very good at highjumping—he could jump six feet high. John Duffy, Corley, was able to dig half an Irish acre in one day. Edward Monaghan, Annagh, who could stand on his head on a pint tumbler or on the rigging of a house.

          –1938 folklore survey to record the local people who occupied the South Ulster parish landscape.

                                                                                                                      * * *

 

 







 

           Kathleen McKenna, Annagola, who was able to wash a week’s sheets, shirts

      and swaddling, bake bread and clean the house

                   all of a Monday.

            Birdy McMahon, of Faulkland, walked to Monaghan for a sack of flour two days before   her eighth child was born.

  Cepta Duffy, Glennan, very good at sewing—embroidered a set of vestments    in five days.

  Mary McCabe, of Derrynashallog, who cared for her husband’s mother in dotage,    fed ten children, the youngest still at the breast during hay-making.  

   Mary Conlon, Tullyree,

   who wrote poems at night.

   Assumpta Meehan, Tonygarvey, saw many visions and was committed to the asylum.  

   Martha McGinn, of Emy, who swam Cornamunden Lough in one hour and a quarter.  

   Marita McHugh, Foxhole, whose sponge cakes won First Prize at Cloncaw Show.  

   Miss Harper, Corley, female problems rarely ceased, pleasant in ill-health.  

   Patricia Curley, Corlatt, whose joints ached and swelled though she was young,    who bore three children.

   Dora Heuston, Strananny, died in childbirth, aged 14 years,   last words ‘Mammy, O Mammy!’

   Rosie McCrudden, Aghabog noted for clean boots, winter or summer,    often beaten by her father.

   Maggie Traynor, Donagh, got no breakfasts, fed by the nuns, batch loaf with jam,    the best speller in the school.

   Phyllis McCrudden, Knockaphubble, who buried two husbands, reared five children,    and farmed her own land.

   Ann Moffett, of Enagh, who taught people to read and did not charge.

"
"







We Had Stalked the Doe 







Commerce. Production. Consumption. Who makes? Who takes? 


It's useless to give up cashmere shawls, gold armatures, SUVs, furs


and silks to achieve cross-cultural pollination or transcendence. 


Since we've ceased to celebrate works-in-progress or cutting-edge sound bites, we photo commodities to provide a permanent record of desire in the grass and under the elms. 


Turkey on the chairlift. 


Rooster in the coop. 


Testimony is a cryptic relic deformed by the violence of authority. We recall the limited palette of ashen tones when we drove through Eastern Europe. Billboards, even in Estonia, summoned up fascinations with dieting, alcoholism and psychotherapy. 


Should we have eaten those salads of language? 


Should we have risked teased hairstyles and gained weight?


Should we have giggled amidst severest woe?


Mimicry, idolatry, fanaticism, greed. Oh, fervid tangled brushwork, what can we do to hold you at bay?


I am old. I am old. The good day grows cold. 

"
"

HOW TO SUCCEED IN TORTURE 

WITHOUT REALLY TRYING

1. FIRST THINGS FIRST: 

Surprise,

            catch your source off balance            when he least expects it:  At the moment he opens his eyes in the morning

While he shits on the can. 

Detain and confine,

                      quickly,        quickly              ​cut him off from the known. 

Plunge your source into the strange, 

                      the invisible wells gone dry in his bones Drained by his eyes

         He’s in occupied territory—

            he could walk a long time and find nowhere, nothing, nada

                  no doors, no tunnels, windows  

2. KEEP IT SIMPLE: 

        

      Familiar clothing reinforces identity. 

       Replace the source"
"







A species of tiny human has been discovered, which lived on the remote Indonesian island of Flores just 18,000 years ago. . . . Researchers have so far unearthed remains from eight individuals who were just one metre tall, with grapefruit-sized skulls. These astonishing little people . . . made tools, hunted tiny elephants and lived at the same time as modern humans who were colonizing the area.

—Nature, October 2004







Light: lifted, I stretch my brief body.

Color: blaze of day behind blank eyes.

Sound: birds stab greedy beaks

Into trunk and seed, spill husk

Onto the heap where my dreaming

And my loving live.

Every day I wake to this.

Tracks follow the heavy beasts

Back to where they huddle, herd.

Hunt: a dance against hunger.

Music: feast and fear.

This island becomes us.

Trees cap our sky. It rustles with delight

In a voice green as lust. Reptiles

Drag night from their tails,

Live by the dark. A rage of waves

Protects the horizon, which we would devour.

One day I want to dive in and drift,

Legs and arms wracked with danger.

Like a dark star. I want to last.

"
"

I am the centre

Of a circle of pain

Exceeding its boundaries in every direction

The business of the bland sun

Has no affair with me

In my congested cosmos of agony

From which there is no escape

On infinitely prolonged nerve-vibrations

Or in contraction

To the pinpoint nucleus of being

Locate an irritation            without

It is                                           within

                                                 Within

It is without

The sensitized area

Is identical            with the extensity

Of intension

I am the false quantity

In the harmony of physiological potentiality

To which

Gaining self-control

I should be consonant

In time

Pain is no stronger than the resisting force

Pain calls up in me

The struggle is equal

The open window is full of a voice

A fashionable portrait painter

Running upstairs to a woman’s apartment

Sings

        “All the girls are tid’ly did’ly

         All the girls are nice

         Whether they wear their hair in curls

         Or —”

At the back of the thoughts to which I permit crystallization

The conception                       Brute

Why?

        The irresponsibility of the male

Leaves woman her superior Inferiority.

He is running upstairs

I am climbing a distorted mountain of agony

Incidentally with the exhaustion of control

I reach the summit

And gradually subside into anticipation of

Repose

Which never comes.

For another mountain is growing up

Which          goaded by the unavoidable

I must traverse

Traversing myself

Something in the delirium of night hours

Confuses while intensifying sensibility

Blurring spatial contours

So aiding elusion of the circumscribed

That the gurgling of a crucified wild beast

Comes from so far away

And the foam on the stretched muscles of a mouth

Is no part of myself

There is a climax in sensibility

When pain surpassing itself

Becomes exotic

And the ego succeeds in unifying the positive and negative  poles of sensation

Uniting the opposing and resisting forces

In lascivious revelation

Relaxation

Negation of myself as a unit

          Vacuum interlude

I should have been emptied of life

Giving life

For consciousness in crises          races

Through the subliminal deposits of evolutionary processes

Have I not

Somewhere

Scrutinized

A dead white feathered moth

Laying eggs?

A moment

Being realization

Can

Vitalized by cosmic initiation

Furnish an adequate apology

For the objective

Agglomeration of activities

Of a life

LIFE

A leap with nature

Into the essence

Of unpredicted Maternity

Against my thigh

Tough of infinitesimal motion

Scarcely perceptible

Undulation

Warmth           moisture

Stir of incipient life

Precipitating into me

The contents of the universe

Mother I am

Identical

With infinite Maternity

    Indivisible

    Acutely

    I am absorbed

    Into

The was—is—ever—shall—be

Of cosmic reproductivity

Rises from the subconscious

Impression of a cat

With blind kittens

Among her legs

Same undulating life-stir

I am that cat

Rises from the sub-conscious

Impression of small animal carcass

Covered with blue bottles—Epicurean—

And through the insects

Waves that same undulation of living

Death

Life

I am knowing

All about

     Unfolding

The next morning

Each woman-of-the-people

Tiptoeing the red pile of the carpet

Doing hushed service

Each woman-of-the-people

Wearing a halo

A ludicrous little halo

Of which she is sublimely unaware

I once heard in a church—Man and woman God made them—

                                               Thank God.

 

"
"

I saw you fall to the ground.

I saw the oaks fall.  The clouds collapsed.

I saw a wildness twist through your limbs

and fly off.  The river fell, the grasses fell. 

The backs of six drowned cattle

rose to the surface ice—nothing moved.

But a wind touched my ankles when the snow began.

You left that night and we stayed,

our arms braced with weight.  What power

there was was over.  But I switched on the light

by the porch to see if anything was falling—

and it fell, a few glints in the air,

catching sun although there was no sun,

and the long descent over hours, all night,

seemed like years, and we buried our faces

in what came to rest on the ground

or moved our feet over it, effortless,

as nothing was in our lives, or ever will be.

 

"
"

      after Neruda

 

Go ahead, ask: where are

the pomegranates, the dates,

the girls with skin brown as hash,

the hash?

 

Listen to what’s happening

 

One morning bonfires

began to leap from the earth,

devouring human beings,

lit by matches flicked across

the sky with joysticks.

And from then on fire,

from then on burning hair,

from then on limbs and meat.

Invisible bandits, pickpockets

from ten-thousand feet,

faceless, thoughtless, dumb

except for humming,

bandits marked with tiny flags,

controlled from continents away

by children, child bandits

with letter jackets left hanging

in their girlfriends' closets,

child bandits with bibles

thumbed and highlighted,

spear missiles through the sky to kill other children

and the blood of children runs through the streets,

neither seen nor heard, obedient,

simply, like children's blood.

 

Ask away: why doesn’t his poetry

describe our urban loneliness,

the body drenched in metaphor?

 

There’s nothing to see here,

nothing to see,

just blood in the sand,

blood in the streets,

nothing to see.

 

"
"

This is a demon that can take a grown brain and squash it to sponge. There is no loving the state

of a decrepit mind that encourages a decrepit body. Is he sleeping or just not there? States of

awareness flicker inside a gauzy lens. We’ve seen this before—in a film, the man disappearing

as he stands right there, his body stolid.

 

Let’s say this man worked as an Assistant Principal and admired his own IQ.

Let’s say this man had a brutish body but was not a brute. All of this becomes portraiture but

there can be fractures of truth.  Looking at him you think: Am I in this film or is this a vapory

memory?"
"

                        for JA

 

I flutter in order

to enter

the phrase’s silver.

 Jackdaws have launched nearby

this time, silk green and ripped,

the movement a kind of chafing thinking.

 

Oh he’s marking

terrain right there—

right there with his

 

unmade song. The shadow kids

whip fronds, froth air up

into heat, pure and simple

 

“violence of the eye.” Wild iris

ink, wet in the margin’s stage.

Well, hadn’t this testament begun

 

to carry its chime in stripes?

That’s when I knew he was going away

from me, towards the sound.

 

Like the ring on the table

it can’t be decentered.

Rim around the recent.

 

Ashes, ashes,

A bright tangled seeming.

 

"
"

You are as even tempered as a frying pan

In a sudden downpour

A campsite in disarray

A long time coming

Laughter from two yards over

The neighborhood a claim on space

Involving multiple parties

 

It must be Father’s Day

Judging by the heightened attentions of daughters and sons

Thus a man enjoys solitude, stillness, pink petals of the carrier rose

And in a certain light

The sonic continuum of tires against the road

The sensation of being carried along toward the end of a sentence

After the disappearance of the period

 

Air to breathe, water to drink

The suggestion box is empty

Obsolete equipment piles up in nooks and crannies

This is all wrong, that’s messed up

We go on in and make ourselves comfortable

The movie has just begun

It’s Nick and Nora Charles and their little dog Asta

 

They’re visiting Nick’s parents in the suburbs

He’s on the wagon and trying to keep a low profile

But of course she brags about him to the local paper

And soon he’s embroiled in detective work despite himself

There is crime everywhere, even here in the suburbs

It must be human nature

Desperate characters on the loose

 

“Yoke yourself to your strongest conviction”

Was a piece of advice derived from the Y in JOY

But Pam doesn’t buy that

And I say it sounds too slavish

Remember the Groucho line

“These are my principles

If you don’t like them I have others”

 

When the pen runs out of ink

You simply replace the cartridge

And continue writing

To the sound of jet planes overhead

It’s time to revive the typewriter

For the benefit of kids

Now entering the ranks of the scribe force

Sliding the paper under the roller

Striking the surface with heavy metal blows

History curls right into the future

A Möbius strip

That brings bygone media around and back

With all the drama, character, sound, light and destiny

Alive in an imagination of living

"
"

It’s unbearable to shadowdrift along the

seabed. It’s unbearable to grieve when

sleeping is more important.

 

The boat is a hammock without strings.

As the body is a sleeve not strung to the

soul. The boat is chained to the shadow;

when the shadow drifts, the boat drifts

too.

 

Is it at sea? Or is it just in air? Can a

boat live on air alone?

 

The man’s back bleeds. This is all

expected of creatures who sacrifice their

nudity for solitude and immortality.

 

The flesh is eager to float, fully

captivated by the impulse to preserve an

array of stillness. The horizon is not

skirring and nothing can move on that

river made of air. This boat. This boat.

 

This boat that the horizon can’t coat

with its own monolithic entreaty.

 

The man bathes in all blemishes of the

moon. The man’s body can take

imperfection, as he feels complete. His

white-grey hair is a type of condensed

cloud he can rest his head on. If he must

commit suicide, he knows he will rest on

a very comfortable pillow, one that he

grows from the ovoid base of his skull.

 

It’s good to get all the hard work done

first and then unbutton one’s corporeal

flesh calmly before the undiluted

enterprise of air.

 

His penis is one finger pointing to the line

that separates his thighs. Everything

is hidden deliciously inside his pituitary

gland.

 

"
"

I have become wealthy in a foreign land

gravity makes me sick in

my slippery throat the devil makes me lousy

with summer like I'm buried in the sun

in its sounds

with my mother

there's something about having

a heart beat like traffic

like wind I did it afterall: I had a sweaty

body in Berlin it was all right

I'm taking some time out

from being alive with daughters

It's OK I'm impersonating a kiss

of lilacs a murder of crows

are settling over my corpse the dust

covers my photographs I only

ever write about childhood

because that was before I died

and now the devil has brought me

back to Berlin in summer

in Stockholm I'm starting to make sense

of my body which is becoming

buried in pop music and now ooh-ooh

I have to rebuild the wall

an erotics based on occupation

I write you a letter ett brev

about my body as if it were

split between foreign words

whispered by stringy angels

and soldiers who march in

through the eye of a needle

I write my body with the eye

of a needle with nålen I write

when I'm sick with gravity

in summer in summer

I'm sick in light summer light

musical light from hell and you

dare call it heaven

my body you dare to call it heaven

"
"

Miracle fruit changes the tongue. One bite, 

and for hours all you eat is sweet. Placed

alone on a saucer, it quivers like it's cold 

from the ceramic, even in this Florida heat. 

Small as a coffee bean, red as jam—

I can't believe. The man who sold

it to my father on Interstate 542 had one

tooth, one sandal, and called me

""Duttah, Duttah."" I wanted to ask what is that, but the red buds teased me 

into our car and away from his fruit stand.

One bite. And if you eat it whole, it softens

and swells your teeth like a mouthful

of mallow. So how long before you lose

a sandal and still walk? How long

before you lose the sweetness? 

"
"







           Fredonia, NY







Of course I regret it. I mean there I was under umbrellas of fruit

so red they had to be borne of Summer, and no other season. 

Flip-flops and fishhooks. Ice cubes made of lemonade and sprigs 

of mint to slip in blue glasses of tea. I was dusty, my ponytail

all askew and the tips of my fingers ran, of course, red

from the fruitwounds of cherries I plunked into my bucket

and still—he must have seen some small bit of loveliness

in walking his orchard with me. He pointed out which trees

were sweetest, which ones bore double seeds—puffing out

the flesh and oh the surprise on your tongue with two tiny stones

(a twin spit), making a small gun of your mouth. Did I mention

my favorite color is red? His jeans were worn and twisty

around the tops of his boot; his hands thick but careful, 

nimble enough to pull fruit from his trees without tearing

the thin skin; the cherry dust and fingerprints on his eyeglasses. 

I just know when he stuffed his hands in his pockets, saidOkay. Couldn't hurt to try? and shuffled back to his roadside stand

to arrange his jelly jars and stacks of buckets, I had made

a terrible mistake. I just know my summer would've been

full of pies, tartlets, turnovers—so much jubilee. 

"
"

To keep me from staying out late at night, 

my mother warned of the Hell Pig. Black and full

of hot drool, eyes the color of a lung—it'd follow me

home if I stayed past my curfew. How to tell my friends

to press Pause in the middle of a video, say their good-byes

while I shuffled up the stairs and into my father's waiting

blue car? How to explain this to my dates, whisper

why we could not finish this dance? It's not like the pig

had any special powers or could take a tiny bite

from my leg—only assurances that it was simply

scandal to be followed home. When my date and I

pull into my driveway and dim the lights, we take

care to make all the small noises that get made

in times like these even smaller: squeaks in the seats, 

a slow spin of the radio dial, the silver click of my belt. 

Too late. A single black hair flickers awake the ear

of the dark animal waiting for me at the end of the walk. 

My fumbling of keys and various straps a wild dance

to the door—the pig grunting in tune to each hurried step, each

of his wet breaths puffing into tiny clouds, a small storm brewing. 

"
"

Flour on the floor makes my sandals 

slip and I tumble into your arms. 

Too hot to bake this morning but

blueberries begged me to fold them

into moist muffins. Sticks of rhubarb 

plotted a whole pie. The windows

are blown open and a thickfruit tang

sneaks through the wire screen

and into the home of the scowly lady

who lives next door. Yesterday, a man 

in the city was rescued from his apartment

which was filled with a thousand rats. 

Something about being angry because

his pet python refused to eat. He let the bloom 

of fur rise, rise over the little gnarly blue rug, 

over the coffee table, the kitchen countertops

and pip through each cabinet, snip

at the stumpy bags of sugar,

the cylinders of salt. Our kitchen is a riot

of pots, wooden spoons, melted butter. 

So be it. Maybe all this baking will quiet

the angry voices next door, if only

for a brief whiff. I want our summers

to always be like this—a kitchen wrecked

with love, a table overflowing with baked goods

warming the already warm air. After all the pots

are stacked, the goodies cooled, and all the counters

wiped clean—let us never be rescued from this mess. 

"
"

In those days, though, I never analysed

Myself even. All analysis comes late.

You catch a sight of Nature, earliest,

In full front sun-face, and your eyelids wink

And drop before the wonder of ‘t; you miss

The form, through seeing the light. I lived, those days,

And wrote because I lived–unlicensed else:

My heart beat in my brain. Life’s violent flood

Abolished bounds,–and, which my neighbour’s field,

Which mine, what mattered? It is so in youth.

We play at leap-frog over the god Term;

The love within us and the love without

Are mixed, confounded; if we are loved or love,

We scarce distinguish. So, with other power.

Being acted on and acting seem the same:

In that first onrush of life’s chariot-wheels,

We know not if the forests move or we.

And so, like most young poets, in a flush

Of individual life, I poured myself

Along the veins of others, and achieved

Mere lifeless imitations of life verse,

And made the living answer for the dead,

Profaning nature. ‘Touch not, do not taste,

Nor handle,’–we’re too legal, who write young:

We beat the phorminx till we hurt our thumbs,

As if still ignorant of counterpoint;

We call the Muse ... ‘O Muse, benignant Muse!’–

As if we had seen her purple-braided head.

With the eyes in it start between the boughs

As often as a stag’s. What make-believe,

With so much earnest! what effete results,

From virile efforts! what cold wire-drawn odes

From such white heats!–bucolics, where the cows

Would scare the writer if they splashed the mud

In lashing off the flies,–didactics, driven

Against the heels of what the master said;

And counterfeiting epics, shrill with trumps

A babe might blow between two straining cheeks

Of bubbled rose, to make his mother laugh;

And elegiac griefs, and songs of love,

Like cast-off nosegays picked up on the road,

The worse for being warm: all these things, writ

On happy mornings, with a morning heart,

That leaps for love, is active for resolve,

Weak for art only. Oft, the ancient forms

Will thrill, indeed, in carrying the young blood.

The wine-skins, now and then, a little warped,

Will crack even, as the new wine gurgles in.

Spare the old bottles!–spill not the new wine.

By Keats’s soul, the man who never stepped

In gradual progress like another man,

But, turning grandly on his central self,

Ensphered himself in twenty perfect years

And died, not young,–(the life of a long life,

Distilled to a mere drop, falling like a tear

Upon the world’s cold cheek to make it burn

For ever;) by that strong excepted soul,

I count it strange, and hard to understand,

That nearly all young poets should write old;

That Pope was sexagenarian at sixteen,

And beardless Byron academical,

And so with others. It may be, perhaps,

Such have not settled long and deep enough

In trance, to attain to clairvoyance,–and still

The memory mixes with the vision, spoils,

And works it turbid.

                  Or perhaps, again,

In order to discover the Muse-Sphinx,

The melancholy desert must sweep round,

Behind you, as before.–

For me, I wrote

False poems, like the rest, and thought them true.

Because myself was true in writing them.

I, peradventure, have writ true ones since

With less complacence.

                    But I could not hide

My quickening inner life from those at watch.

They saw a light at a window now and then,

They had not set there. Who had set it there?

My father’s sister started when she caught

My soul agaze in my eyes. She could not say

I had no business with a sort of soul,

But plainly she objected,–and demurred,

That souls were dangerous things to carry straight

Through all the spilt saltpetre of the world.

She said sometimes, ‘Aurora, have you done

Your task this morning?–have you read that book?

And are you ready for the crochet here?’–

As if she said, ‘I know there’s something wrong,

I know I have not ground you down enough

To flatten and bake you to a wholesome crust

For household uses and proprieties,

Before the rain has got into my barn

And set the grains a-sprouting. What, you’re green

With out-door impudence? you almost grow?’

To which I answered, ‘Would she hear my task,

And verify my abstract of the book?

And should I sit down to the crochet work?

Was such her pleasure?’ ... Then I sate and teased

The patient needle til it split the thread,

Which oozed off from it in meandering lace

From hour to hour. I was not, therefore, sad;

My soul was singing at a work apart

Behind the wall of sense, as safe from harm

As sings the lark when sucked up out of sight,

In vortices of glory and blue air.

And so, through forced work and spontaneous work,

The inner life informed the outer life,

Reduced the irregular blood to settled rhythms,

Made cool the forehead with fresh-sprinkling dreams,

And, rounding to the spheric soul the thin

Pined body, struck a colour up the cheeks,

Though somewhat faint. I clenched my brows across

My blue eyes greatening in the looking-glass,

And said, ‘We’ll live, Aurora! we’ll be strong.

The dogs are on us–but we will not die.’

 

 

"
"



                                         'There it is!–

You play beside a death-bed like a child,

Yet measure to yourself a prophet's place

To teach the living. None of all these things,

Can women understand. You generalise,

Oh, nothing!–not even grief! Your quick-breathed hearts,

So sympathetic to the personal pang,

Close on each separate knife-stroke, yielding up

A whole life at each wound; incapable

Of deepening, widening a large lap of life

To hold the world-full woe. The human race

To you means, such a child, or such a man,

You saw one morning waiting in the cold,

Beside that gate, perhaps. You gather up

A few such cases, and, when strong, sometimes

Will write of factories and of slaves, as if

Your father were a negro, and your son

A spinner in the mills. All's yours and you,–

All, coloured with your blood, or otherwise

Just nothing to you. Why, I call you hard

To general suffering. Here's the world half blind

With intellectual light, half brutalised

With civilization, having caught the plague

In silks from Tarsus, shrieking east and west

Along a thousand railroads, mad with pain

And sin too! ... does one woman of you all,

(You who weep easily) grow pale to see

This tiger shake his cage?–does one of you

Stand still from dancing, stop from stringing pearls

And pine and die, because of the great sum

Of universal anguish?–Show me a tear

Wet as Cordelia's, in eyes bright as yours,

Because the world is mad? You cannot count,

That you should weep for this account, not you!

You weep for what you know. A red-haired child

Sick in a fever, if you touch him once,

Though but so little as with a finger-tip,

Will set you weeping! but a million sick . .

You could as soon weep for the rule of three,

Or compound fractions. Therefore, this same world

Uncomprehended by you must remain

Uninfluenced by you. Women as you are,

Mere women, personal and passionate,

You give us doating mothers, and chaste wives.

Sublime Madonnas, and enduring saints!

We get no Christ from you,–and verily

We shall not get a poet, in my mind.'

'With which conclusion you conclude' . .

                                    'But this–

That you, Aurora, with the large live brow

And steady eyelids, cannot condescend

To play at art, as children play at swords,

To show a pretty spirit, chiefly admired

Because true action is impossible.

You never can be satisfied with praise

Which men give women when they judge a book

Not as mere work, but as mere woman's work,

Expressing the comparative respect

Which means the absolute scorn. 'Oh, excellent!

'What grace! what facile turns! what fluent sweeps!

'What delicate discernment ... almost thought!

'The book does honour to the sex, we hold.

'Among our female authors we make room

'For this fair writer, and congratulate

'The country that produces in these times

'Such women, competent to ... spell.''

                                'Stop there!'

I answered–burning through his thread of talk

With a quick flame of emotion,–'You have read

My soul, if not my book, and argue well

I would not condescend ... we will not say

To such a kind of praise, (a worthless end

Is praise of all kinds) but to such a use

Of holy art and golden life. I am young,

And peradventure weak–you tell me so–

Through being a woman. And, for all the rest,

Take thanks for justice. I would rather dance

At fairs on tight-rope, till the babies dropped

Their gingerbread for joy,–than shift the types

For tolerable verse, intolerable

To men who act and suffer. Better far,

Pursue a frivolous trade by serious means,

Than a sublime art frivolously.'

*

Then I spoke.

'I have not stood long on the strand of life,

And these salt waters have had scarcely time

To creep so high up as to wet my feet.

I cannot judge these tides–I shall, perhaps.

A woman's always younger than a man

At equal years, because she is disallowed

Maturing by the outdoor sun and air,

And kept in long-clothes past the age to walk.

Ah well, I know you men judge otherwise!

You think a woman ripens as a peach,–

In the cheeks, chiefly. Pass it to me now;

I'm young in age, and younger still, I think,

As a woman. But a child may say amen

To a bishop's prayer and see the way it goes;

And I, incapable to loose the knot

Of social questions, can approve, applaud

August compassion, christian thoughts that shoot

Beyond the vulgar white of personal aims.

Accept my reverence.'

                  There he glowed on me

With all his face and eyes. 'No other help?'

Said he–'no more than so?'

                    'What help?' I asked.

'You'd scorn my help,–as Nature's self, you say,

Has scorned to put her music in my mouth,

Because a woman's. Do you now turn round

And ask for what a woman cannot give?'

'For what she only can, I turn and ask,'

He answered, catching up my hands in his,

And dropping on me from his high-eaved brow

The full weight of his soul,–'I ask for love,

And that, she can; for life in fellowship

Through bitter duties–that, I know she can;

For wifehood ... will she?'

                      'Now,' I said, 'may God

Be witness 'twixt us two!' and with the word,

Meseemed I floated into a sudden light

Above his stature,–'am I proved too weak

To stand alone, yet strong enough to bear

Such leaners on my shoulder? poor to think,

Yet rich enough to sympathise with thought?

Incompetent to sing, as blackbirds can,

Yet competent to love, like HIM?'

                            I paused:

Perhaps I darkened, as the lighthouse will

That turns upon the sea. 'It's always so!

Anything does for a wife.'

                      'Aurora, dear,

And dearly honoured' ... he pressed in at once

With eager utterance,–'you translate me ill.

I do not contradict my thought of you

Which is most reverent, with another thought

Found less so. If your sex is weak for art,

(And I who said so, did but honour you

By using truth in courtship) it is strong

For life and duty. Place your fecund heart

In mine, and let us blossom for the world

That wants love's colour in the grey of time.

With all my talk I can but set you where

You look down coldly on the arena-heaps

Of headless bodies, shapeless, indistinct!

The Judgment-Angel scarce would find his way

Through such a heap of generalised distress,

To the individual man with lips and eyes–

Much less Aurora. Ah, my sweet, come down,

And, hand in hand, we'll go where yours shall touch

These victims, one by one! till one by one,

The formless, nameless trunk of every man

Shall seem to wear a head, with hair you know,

And every woman catch your mother's face

To melt you into passion.'

                      'I am a girl,'

I answered slowly; 'you do well to name

My mother's face. Though far too early, alas,

God's hand did interpose 'twixt it and me,

I know so much of love, as used to shine

In that face and another. Just so much;

No more indeed at all. I have not seen

So much love since, I pray you pardon me,

As answers even to make a marriage with,

In this cold land of England. What you love,

Is not a woman, Romney, but a cause:

You want a helpmate, not a mistress, sir,–

A wife to help your ends ... in her no end!

Your cause is noble, your ends excellent,

But I, being most unworthy of these and that,

Do otherwise conceive of love. Farewell.'

'Farewell, Aurora, you reject me thus?'

He said.

        'Why, sir, you are married long ago.

You have a wife already whom you love,

Your social theory. Bless you both, I say.

For my part, I am scarcely meek enough

To be the handmaid of a lawful spouse.

Do I look a Hagar, think you?'

                          'So, you jest!'

'Nay so, I speak in earnest,' I replied.

'You treat of marriage too much like, at least,

A chief apostle; you would bear with you

A wife ... a sister ... shall we speak it out?

A sister of charity.'

                 'Then, must it be

Indeed farewell? And was I so far wrong

In hope and in illusion, when I took

The woman to be nobler than the man,

Yourself the noblest woman,–in the use

And comprehension of what love is,–love,

That generates the likeness of itself

Through all heroic duties? so far wrong

In saying bluntly, venturing truth on love,

'Come, human creature, love and work with me,'–

Instead of, 'Lady, thou art wondrous fair,

'And, where the Graces walk before, the Muse

'Will follow at the lighting of the eyes,

'And where the Muse walks, lovers need to creep

'Turn round and love me, or I die of love.''

With quiet indignation I broke in.

'You misconceive the question like a man,

Who sees a woman as the complement

Of his sex merely. You forget too much

That every creature, female as the male,

Stands single in responsible act and thought

As also in birth and death. Whoever says

To a loyal woman, 'Love and work with me,'

Will get fair answers, if the work and love

Being good themselves, are good for her–the best

She was born for. Women of a softer mood,

Surprised by men when scarcely awake to life,

Will sometimes only hear the first word, love,

And catch up with it any kind of work,

Indifferent, so that dear love go with it:

I do not blame such women, though, for love,

They pick much oakum; earth's fanatics make

Too frequently heaven's saints. But me, your work

Is not the best for,–nor your love the best,

Nor able to commend the kind of work

For love's sake merely. Ah, you force me, sir,

To be over-bold in speaking of myself,–

I, too, have my vocation,–work to do,

The heavens and earth have set me, since I changed

My father's face for theirs,–and though your world

Were twice as wretched as you represent

Most serious work, most necessary work,

As any of the economists'. Reform,

Make trade a Christian possibility,

And individual right no general wrong;

Wipe out earth's furrows of the Thine and Mine,

And leave one green, for men to play at bowls;

With innings for them all! ... what then, indeed,

If mortals were not greater by the head

Than any of their prosperities? what then,

Unless the artist keep up open roads

Betwixt the seen and unseen,–bursting through

The best of your conventions with his best

The unspeakable, imaginable best

God bids him speak, to prove what lies beyond

Both speech and imagination? A starved man

Exceeds a fat beast: we'll not barter, sir,

The beautiful for barley.–And, even so,

I hold you will not compass your poor ends

Of barley-feeding and material ease,

Without a poet's individualism

To work your universal. It takes a soul,

To move a body: it takes a high-souled man,

To move the masses ... even to a cleaner stye:

It takes the ideal, to blow a hair's breadth off

The dust of the actual.–ah, your Fouriers failed,

Because not poets enough to understand

That life develops from within.–For me,

Perhaps I am not worthy, as you say,

Of work like this! ... perhaps a woman's soul

Aspires, and not creates! yet we aspire,

And yet I'll try out your perhapses, sir;

And if I fail ... why, burn me up my straw

Like other false works–I'll not ask for grace,

Your scorn is better, cousin Romney. I

Who love my art, would never wish it lower

To suit my stature. I may love my art,

You'll grant that even a woman may love art,

Seeing that to waste true love on anything,

Is womanly, past question.'

 

 

"
"

Why what a pettish, petty thing I grow,–

A mere, mere woman,–a mere flaccid nerve,-

A kerchief left out all night in the rain,

Turned soft so,–overtasked and overstrained

And overlived in this close London life!

And yet I should be stronger.

                          Never burn

Your letters, poor Aurora! for they stare

With red seals from the table, saying each,

'Here's something that you know not.'

 

"
"

falling into unearthed light or something like that is who I was last night. you brought

me a drink you didn’t know the name of & told me I could get it. you

not the drink which I downed even though it was my 9th

of the night the drink not you. dancehall. always

dancehall. a manner of movement learned

& not easily lost so I wind my hips

anyway & something is happening

to you. you bout to startsome shit & I say good. not

because it would be.

I haven’t been

touched

in a while.don’t start something you can’t finish is maybe the worst advice

I’ve ever heard as you drop a handful of my ass

thudding down a small flight of stairs.

that’s what I am. a small flight

of stairs, a small

flight, down.

"
"

As fresh garbage is. As dirt sucked out of a fingernail. As a wall clean of prostitutes. When I am this I am at the mercy of my nakedness. A pillar of undress whose power I do not know how to wield. I watch porn. I study the geometry of limbs splayed. Not the moan but the angle of a moan. I swallow. In this way I am a thief. Sometimes I forget my body & go untouched until I am touched & scream. Sometimes I want to eat my breasts down to their bitter rind & spit them out. I want to be the bitter rind without suck and easily thrown. Easily thrown I want to be the pebble thumbed & wished upon before enveloping the lake I sink in. I sink in you the lake & by lake I mean gutter a water that does not hold me well. Here we are not the bodies our mothers made. If you are to hold me hold me as a gun. Grip me & profit the dark. The unattended purse. The pair of heels darting from us in dull claps sharpening against the concrete as teeth against a stone.

"
"

bijan been dead 11 months & my blue margin reduced to arterial, there’s a party at my house, a house held by legislation vocabulary & trill. but hell, it’s ours & it sparkle on the corner of view park, a channel of blk electric. danny wants to walk to the ledge up the block, & we an open river of flex: we know what time it is. on the ledge, folk give up neck & dismantle gray navigation for some slice of body. it’s june. it’s what we do.

 

walk down the middle of our road, & given view park, a lining of dubois’ 10th, a jack n jill feast, & good blk area, it be our road. we own it. I’m sayin’ with money. our milk neighbors, collaborate in the happy task of surveillance. they new. they pivot function. they call the khaki uniforms. i swift. review the architecture of desire spun clean, & I could see how we all look like ghosts.

 

3 squad cars roll up at my door & it’s a fucking joke cuz exactly no squad cars rolled up to the mcdonald’s bijan was shot at & exactly no squad cars rolled up to find the murders & exactly no one did what could be categorized as they “job,” depending on how you define time spent for money earned for property & it didn’t make me feel like I could see less of the gun in her holster because she was blk & short & a woman, too. she go,

 this your house? 

I say yeah. she go,can you prove it? 

It say it mine. 

she go ID? I say it mine. 

she go backup on the sly

& interview me going all what’s your address—don’t look!& hugh say I feel wild disrespected. 

& white go can you explain that? 

& danny say how far the nearest precinct? 

& christian say fuck that. 

& white go can you explain that?

 

I cross my arms. I’m bored & headlights quit being interesting after I called 911 when I was 2 years old because it was the only phone number I knew by heart.

"
"

On the side of the road a deer, frozen, frigid.Go back to your life, the voice said.What is my life? she wondered. For months she lost

herself in work—Freud said work is as important

as love to the soul—and at night she sat with a boy,

forcing him to practice his violin, helping him recite his notes.

Then the ice thawed and the deer came to life.

She saw her jump over the fence, she saw her in the twilight,

how free she looked. She saw her eyes shiny as marbles,

as much a part of this world as the fence a worker

pounds into the earth. At night she still sat with the boy.

He’s learning “Au Claire de la Lune.”

Do you know it? He has established a relationship

with his violin. He knows that it takes practice to master it:

the accuracy of each note, to wrestle his feelings to the listener.

But he’s impatient. Sometimes what he hears and feels

are not always the same. Again, the poet says.

She knows if he tries to silence his fervor, he might not ever know

who he is. The poet contemplates whether a deer can dream.

Rich blood-red berries on a branch, pachysandra in the garden.

A soft warm bed in the leaves.

"
"

In syrup, in syrup,

In syrup we drown,

 

Who sell ourselves

With a sparkling smile.

 

Padded with pathos

Our winding sheet.

 

The bomb bounded

By buxom beauties.

 

Horror gelded

By the happy ending.

 

How can we swim

Who hold to our haloes?

 

Down we go, down

In syrup, in syrup.

"
"

…When that joy is gone for good

I move the arms beneath the blood.

 

When my blood is running wild

I sew the clothing of a child.

 

When that child is never born

I lean my breast against a thorn.

 

When the thorn brings no reprieve

I rise and live, I rise and live.

 

When I live from hand to hand

Nude in the marketplace I stand.

 

When I stand and am not sold

I build a fire against the cold.

 

When the cold does not destroy

I leap from ambush on my joy…

"
"







—after Lorca







I want to always sleep beneath a bright red blanket

of leaves. I want to never wear a coat of ice.

I want to learn to walk without blinking.

 

I want to outlive the turtle and the turtle’s father,

the stone. I want a mouth full of permissions

 

and a pink glistening bud. If the wildflower and ant hill

can return after sleeping each season, I want to walk

out of this house wearing nothing but wind.

 

I want to greet you, I want to wait for the bus with you

weighing less than a chill. I want to fight off the bolts

 

of gray lighting the alcoves and winding paths

of your hair. I want to fight off the damp nudgings

of snow. I want to fight off the wind.

 

I want to be the wind and I want to fight off the wind

with its sagging banner of isolation, its swinging

 

screen doors, its gilded boxes, and neatly folded pamphlets

of noise. I want to fight off the dull straight lines

of two by fours and endings, your disapprovals,

 

your doubts and regulations, your carbon copies.

If the locust can abandon its suit,

 

I want a brand new name. I want the pepper’s fury

and the salt’s tenderness. I want the virtue

of the evening rain, but not its gossip.

 

I want the moon’s intuition, but not its questions.

I want the malice of nothing on earth. I want to enter

 

every room in a strange electrified city

and find you there. I want your lips around the bell of flesh

 

at the bottom of my ear. I want to be the mirror,    

but not the nightstand. I do not want to be the light switch.

I do not want to be the yellow photograph

 

or book of poems. When I leave this body, Woman,

I want to be pure flame. I want to be your song.

 

"
"

If you subtract the minor losses,

you can return to your childhood too:

the blackboard chalked with crosses,

 

the math teacher’s toe ring. You

can be the black boy not even the buck-

toothed girls took a liking to:

 

this match box, these bones in their funk

machine, this thumb worn smooth

as the belly of a shovel. Thump. Thump.

 

Thump. Everything I hold takes root.

I remember what the world was like before

I heard the tide humping the shore smooth,

 

and the lyrics asking: How long has your door been closed? I remember a garter belt wrung

like a snake around a thigh in the shadows

 

of a wedding gown before it was flung

out into the bluest part of the night.

Suppose you were nothing but a song

 

in a busted speaker? Suppose you had to wipe

sweat from the brow of a righteous woman,

but all you owned was a dirty rag? That’s why

 

the blues will never go out of fashion:

their half rotten aroma, their bloodshot octaves of

consequence; that’s why when they call, Boy, you’re in

trouble. Especially if you love as I love

falling to the earth. Especially if you’re a little bit

high strung and a little bit gutted balloon. I love

 

watching the sky regret nothing but its

self, though only my lover knows it to be so,

and only after watching me sit

 

and stare off past Heaven. I love the word No 

for its prudence, but I love the romantic

who submits finally to sex in a burning row-

 

house more. That’s why nothing’s more romantic

than working your teeth through

the muscle. Nothing’s more romantic

 

than the way good love can take leave of you.

That’s why I’m so doggone lonesome, Baby,

yes, I’m lonesome and I’m blue.

 

"
"

Did your father come home after fighting

through the week at work? Did the sweat change

to salt in his ears? Was that bitter white

 

grain the only music he’d hear? Is this why

you were quiet when other poets sang

of the black man’s beauty? Is this why

 

you choked on the tonsil of Negro Duty?

Were there as many offices for pain

as love? Should a black man never be shy?

 

Was your father a mountain twenty

shovels couldn’t bury? Was he a train

leaving a lone column of smoke? Was he

 

a black magnolia singing at your feet?

Was he a blackjack smashed against your throat?

"
"

In standing position

with arms to the side,

 

jump while

spreading the legs

and lift arms

above the head.

 

Jump back into

standing position

and up again,

spreading the legs

and lifting the arms

above the head.

 

Repeat

 

When a M16 landmine

is triggered, it will

spring into the air

and explode with

a capacity to level

everything in a

150 metre radius.

 

Deadly shrapnel

spreading

a further 350 metres.

 

Metal casings

from an unexploded

bomb can fetch

25,000 Vietnamese dong

or $1

 

for a poor family

in Vietnam.

 

Men comb

the forests

and beaches

of Quang Tri

looking for the metal

that will feed their family,

risking their lives.

 

Children working

in the fields think it’s

a toy they’ve found.

 

Nguyen was hoeing

a small piece of land

his parents gave him

when an unexploded

U.S. military bomb

was triggered

and blew off both

his hands.

"
"







""In spite of everything I shall rise again: I will take up my pencil, which I have forsaken in my great discouragement, and I will go on with my drawing.""—Vincent Van Gogh

 







A missile is shaped like a pencil—

its long, slender body and pointed

end creates history.

 

A girl walking down the street

a few steps ahead of her sister and friend,

two medics who were trying to help

injured people, the parked ambulance—

all were annihilated by the same weapon.

 

Above, drones—silent, unmanned planes.

A metal, predatory bird that shoots a missile

with precision, identifying the colors of a shirt,

the features on a face—the shape of a nose,

the color and length of a mustache.

 

In a room far away, in another country, a man

sits at a desk and looks at a screen; he strokes

his thick, dark mustache as he carefully

contemplates, then pushes a button.

 

There is a charred hole in the ground

where the girl once stood.

 

There are pencils that write and erase,

write and erase, so that there is nothing

to be read on the page. The page blank

as the desert sky, blank as the smooth shell of a drone.

 

There is a family drinking mint tea

in a living room.

The man holds a cup to his lips,

the glass touches his mustache.

A silent bird hovers above.

In a split second, everyone is dead,

the house is in rubbles—arms, legs,

splattered organs among broken concrete.

 

Soon, there will be no trace.  

"
"

I close my eyes so that I can see it.

What we so freely eliminate. Who is

 

not guilty of it? We reek of paper.

Everywhere we go is paper. Our

 

hands are stained with paper.

Walls. What echoes from our walls.

 

The sweet whisper of rainforest—

even the name makes the sound of

 

rushing water or perhaps it’s a ghost

that haunts us. They say the dead

 

that did not die a peaceful death are

doomed forever to wander the earth.

 

But perhaps this earth is for them

already a cemetery—stacks and

 

stacks of flesh on a desk. Which

one belongs to which tree?

 

Already, we’ve traded oxygen for

so much.

"
"

I am tired of having five different names;                      -

Having to change them when I enter

 

A new country or take on a new life. My

First name is my truest, I suppose, but I

 

Never use it and nobody calls me by this Vietnamese

Name though it is on my birth certificate—

 

Tue My Chuc. It makes the sound of a twang of a

String pulled. My parents tell me my name in Cantonese

 

is Chuc Mei Wai. Three soft bird chirps and they call

me Ah Wai. Shortly after I moved to the U.S., I became

 

Teresa My Chuc, then Teresa Mei Chuc. “Teresa” is the sound

Water makes when one is washing one’s hands. After my first

 

Marriage, my name was Teresa Chuc Prokopiev.

After my second marriage, my name was Teresa Chuc Dowell.

 

Now I am back to Teresa Mei Chuc, but I want to go way back.

Reclaim that name once given and lost so quickly in its attempt

 

to become someone that would fit in. Who is Tue My Chuc?

I don’t really know. I was never really her and her birthday

 

on March 16, I never celebrate because it’s not my real birthday

though it is on my birth certificate. My birthday is on January 26,

 

really, but I have to pretend that it’s on March 16

because my mother was late registering me after the war.

 

Or it’s in December, the date changing every year according to

the lunar calendar—this is the one my parents celebrate

 

because it’s my Chinese birthday. All these names

and birthdays make me dizzy. Sometimes I just don’t feel like a

 

Teresa anymore; Tue (pronounced Twe) isn’t so embarrassing.

A fruit learns to love its juice. Anyways, I’d like to be string...

 

resonating. Pulled back tensely like a bow

 

Then reverberate in the arrow’s release straight for the heart.

"
"

Is it you on the other end of the line

     hesitant to speak to me, pausing for a moment

to register my hello so you know my number

     stayed the same, my last name remains mine?

Though my voice isn’t young as when we last spoke,

     don’t you hear a familiar timbre?

Still you hesitate so as not to startle me

     after all this time. Dots string out like an ellipsis

in the endless sentence of your absence.

     I hear static-filled ticking, then

a friendly stranger mispronounces my name.

     Recognizing a pitch to sell something

and feeling foolish, I hang up quickly.

     Won’t you ever break your long silence?

Sorrow and anger keep my line open to you.

 

"
"

Come home, our sons, young drivers,

tell us you’re safe, not detained again

by police for your dark color,

sprocketed hair and a crime

you didn’t commit.

Maybe your car’s the wrong make

or rusty in a neighborhood

where cars park in garages at night.

 

Once, when you saw a squad car

you remembered Officer Smiley

and his dog that did tricks

in read-aloud books at J.J. Hill School.

Now, as you reach for your license

with shaking hands, tension raises

the chance something will go wrong.

 

This poem is for you, sons,

and for everyone who is afraid—

citizens of police, police of citizens.

It’s for Philando Castile,

a black school lunch supervisor

in an inner city school

who memorized children’s names

and their food allergies.

And it’s for the policeman

who stopped a car with a damaged taillight.

After he used his gun, his voice broke

like a frightened child’s.

 

Come home, sons, to mothers like me,

alert at night waiting for car lights

to beam in front of our house,

for the car to belong to our sons,

and our sons

to still belong to the world.

"
"

Blue numbers on my bedside clock

tell I forgot to change the hour.

This sets routines on haywire.

 

Like a domestic goat staked

to its circle of earth.

I don’t do well untethered.

 

I have no hunger for early dinner,

become confused by the sound

of children who seem out

 

too late for a school night.

They’ve found an extra helping

of daylight to romp on new grass

 

and can’t contain themselves,

strip off jackets, scatter

like a rag of ponies.

 

Whatever time says,

their joy insists

on springing forward.

"
"

Weeks after ice-out,

last fall’s leaves

make a pathway

to the lake, radiant blue

and still deathly cold.

 

I press my hot forehead

to the window,

smudging it. Blow

and the glass steams.

As if looking at a photo

through parchment,

I’m detached,

the way I saw his body

in the CAT scan

from a foggy distance.

 

I’d like to open the window,

release a wounded bird

nursed to health.

Wiping the glass

with my sleeve

I see white pelicans

wheel and flash in the sky.

"
"







It's hard to be humble when you're 235 pounds of twisted steel and sex appeal with a body women love and men fear. —Sputnik Monroe







When my father died, he left me a trove

           of video tapes, a warped memorial

for those men he watched with my mother

           before she left for parts unknown,

for those fights he relived once he was laid

           off from the plane yards. We watched

men like Sputnik Monroe bleed the hard way,

           shook our fists as he broke rules

against guys who were easier to cheer.

           He was a bad Elvis, greased-back

hair with a shock of white, Sputnik Monroe

           mixed it up everywhere, a rodeo

fistfight, a henhouse tornado. My mother

           picked a fight in an Idaho truck stop

once, stabbed a man’s chest with her middle

           finger, then stepped to one side

so my father could fight him in the parking lot.

           Afterwards, my mother was silent

all the way back to Seattle, her disgust

           with him—the way he wrapped his arm

around her shoulder, guided her to the car,

           and sped back to the freeway—hanging

between them from that point forward.

           Sputnik Monroe clobbered men

wherever he went, sneered at those fists

           raised against him in Memphis.

Some nights, as my wife sleeps upstairs,

           I watch my father’s video tapes and

imagine what I would have done that day

           if I knew that my marriage depended

on what I did with my hands.

"
"

           13.

After the dinosaurs fell

asleep, after those terrible lizards

began their slow decay into mythology,

Andre the Giant was there to cradle

their bodies in his soft hands and weep.

 

            24.

Andre the Giant wrestled the Earth

into a globe, carved his name into the ocean

floor with his pinky to remind the whales

who taught them to sing.

 

            32.

Andre the Giant was a village.

Then he became a dragon.

Then he became an army.

Then he became a king.

Now, he is the wind.

 

            40.

A man can’t bodyslam Andre the Giant

unless he’s worthy of slaying a monster, unless

the giant decides it’s time to lie down.

 

            58.

Andre the Giant stole fire from Heaven,

hid it in his mouth, fed it to monkeys

one lick at a time until they learned

to pronounce his name.

 

            67.

Before there were boys with magic

beanstalks, with slingshots or singing

swords, Andre the Giant brawled

with sooty angels, volcanoes spouting

from where he buried their hearts

 

            75. 

Andre the Giant scaled the Empire

State Building with Marilyn Monroe

in one hand, Cleopatra in the other.

They marveled at how small we are.

 

            81.

Andre the Giant once cracked the sky’s ribs.

Then he was thunder churning like trout.

Then he was an avalanche of fists and knees.

Then he was a fire burning through the forest.

Then he was a tidal wave seething offshore.

Now, he will not be a metaphor.

 

            93.

When Andre the Giant pitched a man

over the top rope and out into the crowd,

he aimed at the moon.

 

            100.

A man never tells a lie, always treats a promise

like his mother’s name. Andre the Giant

once threw a silver dollar across the Potomac,

hit a buffalo in the eye and killed it as it grazed.

 

            116.

Andre the Giant drank three bottles of whiskey

and grappled with the Devil in a bingo hall

in Memphis. Then he invented the blues.

 

            125.

On television, Andre the Giant grinned

with a mouthful of shark’s teeth. He devoured

mortal men ten-at-a-time, laughed and spit

their bones into our living rooms.

 

            137.

Andre the Giant was a Frenchman.

Then he became an ogre.

Then he became a movie star.

Now, he is the constellations.

All of them.

"
"

            1.

A man can stand with both feet touching

the ground until his legs no longer reach

that far, until the ground disappears.

 

            2.

Giant Baba stands six feet ten inches tall, taller

in Japan. It doesn’t matter how tall you are.

            3.

A man can hold a woman, can’t stand to lose

her to the heart’s wreckage. His body will fall

apart one day—a rock crab’s chassis stripped

clean by seagulls, a dandelion gone to seed.

 

           4.

Giant Baba stands over seven feet tall.

When he lifts you over his head, you will be

eight and a half feet above the ground.

 

            5.

A man can stand for anything when seen

from below—fatherhood, majesty, satisfaction

after conquest. In the end all men are seen

from above—patch of lawn, chunk of stone.

 

            6.

Giant Baba towers above your house,

dangles you by the ankle. Your life

looks so small from the sky.

 

            7.

A man and a woman can wrestle together

in the same bed. A man and a woman

and a marriage can brawl all night.

 

            8.

Giant Baba looms dark against the stars, back

blotting out the Milky Way, arms cradling you

and your family history. Listen to his mammoth

heartbeat, war drum, earthquake. Just listen.

 

            9.

A man can stand naked in a foreign country,

can search for meaning in strange tongues. He tries

to find himself in stories about famous battles,

about giants. It doesn’t matter where he stands.

 

            10.

Giant Baba’s body is made of girders

and mastodon bones. When you stand outside

to look at your house from new angles,

when you think of how your father died,

the giant will be there to catch you.

 

"
"

When I open the door

and reach to the light switch

the world opens as it did each time.

 

The garlic jar on the ledge,

the ceramic cup holding

cheese cutters and paring knives.

 

Outside a branch

from the ash tree

worries the window.

 

It was a place where I knew

the drawer pulls, the feel of steps

to the basement, the smell of cool cement.

 

If I open the middle cabinet,

the linen is there as you left it,

well-ordered, none of it fine.

 

"
"

Given over to love,

she un-balls the socks,

 

lets fall debris of days,

leaf litter, sand grain,

 

slub of some sticky substance,

picks it all for the sake

 

of the stainless tub

of the gleaming new front loader.

 

Given over to love long ago, when her own

exasperated moan bounced off

 

the quaint speckled enamel

of the top loader

 

vowing: she'd do this always and well.

She fell in love then, she fell in line—

 

in a march of millions, you pair them,

two by two, you marry the socks.

 

"
"

   I've become the person who says Darling, who says Sugarpie,     Honeybunch, Snugglebear—and that’s just for my children.     What I call my husband is unprintable. You’re welcome. I am     his sweetheart, and finally, finally—I answer to his call and his     alone. Animals are named for people, places, or perhaps a little     Latin. Plants invite names for colors or plant-parts. When you     get a group of heartbeats together you get names that call out     into the evening’s first radiance of planets: a quiver of cobras,     a maelstrom of salamanders, an audience of squid, or an ostentation     of peacocks. But what is it called when creatures on this earth curl     and sleep, when shadows of moons we don’t yet know brush across     our faces? And what is the name for the movement we make when     we wake, swiping hand or claw or wing across our face, like trying     to remember a path or a river we’ve only visited in our dreams.    

"
"

   I blush quicker than a school of blue jack mackerel

arranging itself into an orb of dazzle to avoid      

nips and gulps from the dolphins who’ve been silently     trailing them, waiting for them to relax. When I hear      

her growl—her scratch-thirst and giggle when she drops     swear words pressed to wax—I can’t even look him

      in the eye when I ask him to give it a good listen     with me. But he does, ever patient, and we both get

      a light bless of sweat on, a bright address that still maps     us to each other after all this time. When I read him      

the lyrics, the pink of my cheeks is like the pink        of an orchid mantis. Just when you least expect it,

      the pretend flower will reach out and snatch a butterfly     from the air. When I say flower I mean how her song

      blooms in the cicada-electric Mississippi night. When I say      pink I mean nectar I mean a long kiss good and sweet.    

"
"

   Breathe deep even if it means you wrinkle     your nose from the fake-lemon antiseptic

      of the mopped floors and wiped-down     doorknobs. The freshly soaped necks

      and armpits. Your teacher means well,     even if he butchers your name like

      he has a bloody sausage casing stuck     between his teeth, handprints

      on his white, sloppy apron. And when     everyone turns around to check out

      your face, no need to fush red and warm.     Just picture all the eyes as if your classroom

      is one big scallop with its dozens of icy blues     and you will remember that winter your family      

took you to the China Sea and you sank     your face in it to gaze at baby clams and sea stars      

the size of your outstretched hand. And when     all those necks start to crane, try not to forget      

someone once lathered their bodies, once patted them     dry with a fluffy towel after a bath, set out their clothes      

for the first day of school. Think of their pencil cases     from third grade, full of sharp pencils, a pink pearl eraser.      

Think of their handheld pencil sharpener and its tiny blade.     

"
"

I don't love my son

the way I thought

my mother should love me

so I handed him a shoe box

to put the dead bird in

and shut the door. 

It was a mistake, 

not to be sure he buried it, 

not to grab the children

gathered at my back door

by their shoulders

to push them into a half-circle

and a prayer. 

Should have made them

take turns digging the hole,

each one of their pudgy hands

finger stiff red's box

to lower it to the ground. 

It wasn't my place

to teach other women's children

about death, so my own son

snuck the shoe box

into his backpack,

dead-eyed bird rolling

like a plastic prize ball,

told the principal

this cold puff

of field bird

had been his pet. 

See him

clutching a coffin

the size of his feet,

eyes wide over a pout,

giving a man a reason

good enough to hold him. 

                                                        after Louise Glück

"
"

What is skin,

if not a taut swaddle

loosening, body

if not a warm swaddle

cooling, blood

if not thread

in a swaddle

made of body, horizons

if not lines

where sky swaddles

Earth. See father.Stars, if not swaddled

matter emitting light. See spirit.Wind, if it does not trace

paths around bodies. See blood.Universe, if not outermost

concentric circle. See mother.

A kiss, if not mouths pressed

into wet twists, taste

if not flavor swaddling 

tongue, father

if not the option

to swaddle, spirit

if not the smallest unit

of the swaddled, mother

if not hips

swaddling womb. See skin.

See body. See wind. See universe. See blood.

                                                                ​after Nin Andrews

"
"

A mouth is a sideways woman,

her curves and dips, the way she opens,

how her hollow center can sing.

Mother, your mouth

is a fallen cello,

your husband's hands—

a casket. Full of me. 

"
"

II. 

The first time I had you killed

I made you a hero of the Vietnam War. 

The third grade social studies textbook said

young foreign boys hid grenades 

during corner games, seamstresses doubled

as spies. Why wouldn't you have died

on those streets, clutching my mother's

photo with your thumb pressed cold 

against her belly, wishing you'd had a chance 

to propose, hoping for a girl? But that war

ended before I was born. Next,

I had a drunk driver end you. Said I visited him

in prison to spit in his face. Forgave him

for a speech during health class. In eighth grade,

I made you die young of natural causes,

so I could teach a grieving classmate

the proper way to mourn. 

"
"

When bombs are exploding outside, 

it means that there are implosions. 

Vibrations travel through air and liquid.

My amniotic fluid is imprinted with airplanes

dropping bombs and screams and fire. 

In the bomb shelter in Saigon, 

my father teaches my two-year-old

brother French. ""Je m'appelle Chuc Nai Dat.""

""Je m'appelle…""

"
"

A bullet is made of

copper or lead. 

Gunpowder is

poured into the case. 

The firing pin hits the

primer at the back of

the bullet which starts

the explosion.  Altogether, 

the bullet and the case are

typically about two inches in length

and weigh a few ounces.

My father said that

the Vietcongs

told him and the other 

prisoners while in 

""re-education"" camp

that they were not worth a bullet.

They would work for the Vietcongs

and then die.

A bamboo tree is smooth, long

with roots that hold the earth 

with the strong grip of green

knuckles and fingers.

They are used to build houses,

fences, etc.

A bamboo tree can weigh sixty pounds

or more and be twenty feet tall. 

The prisoners were forced to

walk barefoot up the mountains

and carry bamboo back to the camp.

Due to the weight of the bamboo,

they were only able to carry one

at a time.

"
"

are real. They jump from roof-top

to roof-top, do a backward flip

down to the concrete floor and land

perfectly on two feet. 

The metal of swords clang,

the body moves with the precision

of a praying mantis striking 

its prey.

Their dresses are colorful, long

and lacy, billow and flair

with each turn and twist. 

Jewelry in the hair dangles and sparkles.

Chinese female kung-fu superheroes

are smart, fight bad guys, do good deeds,

and risk their lives.

They appear when least expected.

Chinese female kung-fu superheroes

never give up. They travel often alone

by foot through mountains. They work hard

training to master various martial arts forms.

They do not care about Barbies,

those plastic dolls of only one hair color

that just looked pretty in the 80's. They aren't

impressed; they do not want a boring life. 

Chinese female kung-fu superheroes venture out

and save cities against villains. They steal into the night

in their black ninja-like suits, soundlessly through a house

to recover a magical sword and to release a prisoner,

knowing exactly where to press with their two fingertips

to freeze the guards and to accomplish their mission. 

                                                                            After Jeannine Hall Gailey's

                                                                            "
"

My doggy ate my essay.

He picked up all my mail.

He cleaned my dirty closet

and dusted with his tail.

 

He straightened out my posters

and swept my wooden floor.

My parents almost fainted

when he fixed my bedroom door.

 

I did not try to stop him.

He made my windows shine.

My room looked like a palace,

and my dresser smelled like pine.

 

He fluffed up every pillow.

He folded all my clothes.

He even cleaned my fish tank

with a toothbrush and a hose.

 

I thought it was amazing

to see him use a broom.

I’m glad he ate my essay

on “How to Clean My Room.”

 

"
"

The letter A is awesome!

It simply is the best.

Without an A, you could not get

an A+ on a test.

You’d never see an acrobat

or eat an apple pie.

You couldn’t be an astronaut

or kiss your aunt goodbye.

An antelope would not exist.

An ape would be unknown.

You’d never hear a person

say “Afraid” or “All Alone”.

The A’s in avocado

would completely disappear

and certain words would be forgot

like “ankle”, “arm”, and “ear”.

 

Without the A, you couldn’t aim

an arrow in the air.

You wouldn’t ask for apricots

or almonds at a fair.

Aruba and Australia

would be missing from a map.

You’d never use an ATM,

an apron, or an app.

The arctic fox and aardvark

would be absent from the zoo,

and vowels, as you know them,

would be E, I, O, and U.

There wouldn’t be an A chord

on the instruments you play.

Let’s appreciate, admire,

and applaud the letter A!

 

"
"

Recess! Oh, Recess!

We love you! You rule!

You keep us away

from the teachers in school.

Your swings are refreshing.

Your slides are the best.

You give us a break

from a really hard test.

 

Recess! Oh, Recess!

We want you to know,

you’re sweeter than syrup,

you’re special like snow.

You don’t assign homework.

You make the day fun.

You let us play kickball

and run in the sun.

 

Recess! Oh, Recess!

You’re first on our list.

We’d be in despair

if you didn’t exist.

We’re happy we have you.

You’re awesome and cool.

Recess! Oh, Recess!

We love you! You rule!

 

"
"

Our grandma kissed a pumpkin

on a Friday afternoon.

She also kissed a crayon

and a giant red balloon.

I saw her kiss a chipmunk

eating cookies with a queen.

She kissed us in these costumes

at our house on Halloween!

 

"
"

Our teacher gave detention

to the fountains in the hall.

She handed extra homework

to the artwork on the wall.

 

We saw her point a finger

at a banner and a sign.

She said their bad behavior

was completely out of line.

 

The principal approached her

and said, “What is all this fuss?

I heard you tried to punish

all the tires on a bus.

 

“You’ve made the teachers angry

by disrupting all their classes,

so if you want to keep this job,

you have to wear your glasses!”

 

"
"

I strip the porch roof, pick out the used

nails, and toss the shingles down onto

 

a drop cloth, remembering when I shingled

my grandmother's roof fifty years ago:

 

the tar smell, the brackets, planks, and

ladders all the same, but level now

 

with hemlock limbs instead of locust.

I lug four shingles up the ladder, kneel

 

and drive the old nails home, slide

another shingle into place, pound,

 

toes bent, knees creaking. Miserliness,

a friend jokes about the nails, but I call it

 caring, thinking of the man who gave

us this land on the cove, the cottage, the boat-

 

house full of boats. The only time I saw

him he was at his work bench, a rich

 

man straightening nails, moving from

the bent can to the anvil to the straight.

"
"

For days now a red-breasted bird

has been trying to break in.

She tests a low branch, violet blossoms

swaying beside her, leaps into the air and flies

straight at my window, beak and breast

held back, claws raking the pane.

Maybe she longs for the tree she sees

reflected in the glass, but I'm only guessing.

I watch until she gives up and swoops off.

I wait for her return, the familiar

click, swoosh, thump of her. I sip cold coffee

and scan the room, trying to see it new,

through the eyes of a bird. Nothing has changed.

Books piled in a corner, coats hooked

over chair backs, paper plates, a cup

half-filled with sour milk.

The children are in school. The man is at work.

I'm alone with dead roses in a jam jar.

What do I have that she could want enough

to risk such failure, again and again?

 

"
"

She could be a Norman Rockwell painting,

the small girl on my front porch with her eager

face, her wind-burned cheeks red as cherries.

Her father waits by the curb, ready to rescue

his child should danger threaten, his shadow

reaching halfway across the yard. I take the

booklet from the girl's outstretched hand,

peruse the color photos of candy bars and

caramel-coated popcorn, pretend to read it.

I have no use for what she's selling, but I

can count the freckles on her nose, the scars

like fat worms on knobby knees that ought

to be covered on a cold day like this, when

the wind is blowing and the trees are losing

their grip on the last of their leaves. I'll taketwo of these and one of those, I say, pointing,

thinking I won't eat them, but I probably will.

It's worth the coming calories to see her joy,

how hard she works to spell my name right,

taking down my information. Then she turns

and gives a thumbs-up sign to her father, who

grins like an outfielder to whom the ball has

finally come—his heart like a glove, opening.

"
"

4But you had the sense that he was always competing with your father for your affection.

 

Not only my father. He didn’t understand my need to develop ties in these new worlds. He tried to legislate over my feelings. He was subject to extraordinarily inappropriate fits of jealousy.

 How are you the judge of that?

 

Many small incidents.

 Such as…

 

                                                             *

 

The boy’s name was Warren. He was an orphan.

As we pulled into the weed lot of the camp

in the uncertain March air and patented silence,

I could see him peeking down at us

from a second story dormer window,

like someone who had been dreaming of escape

from the run-down resort: torn up turf; dirt

basketball court, net hanging for its life by one

thin strand of rope; horseshoes, shuffle board;

musty, mildewed cabins with wet bedding;

the stars pressing too hard against our faces

in the catastrophic silence of the nights…

I’d never been left so happily alone,

alone, that is, in Warren’s wonderful company.

His talk mimicked the cadence of the stones he kicked.

Warren showed me the mica glow in the arrowheads

and quartz-tipped spears he'd unearthed.

Warren's cigar box overflowed with other people's

souvenirs, miniature monuments, key chains, lighters,

and initialed items like cuff links and bracelets.

He scoured the corners of the rooms of the departed

while his “mother,” slip of the tongue there, vacuumed.

“People always leave something behind,” he said.

I knew what he meant: taking their clothes

on and off so many times something

had to go. I wanted an initial bracelet

even with someone else’s initials.

The kids at summer camp in the Poconos all had

initialed bracelets, except for me,

but who among them had been west

of the Mississippi?

Warren wanted a home. I didn’t know what I wanted.

I asked to bring Warren home and give him a home.

“That’s ridiculous, he has a home here.

Besides, you only just met.”

My mother lamented his stick-thin, soot-blackened frame,

the smell he gave off and his yellow teeth,

his urchin eating with his hands,

his short and choppy hair,

his blousy shirt and baggy fatigues

that gave him a bulk, a volume,

he didn’t otherwise possess.

What about his fits of giddy delight?

As the days passed I forgot myself.

I became more and more like Warren.

I would brook no insults about my brother.

It would no longer be me, but me and Warren.

I’d share my meals with Warren, and my desk at school.

Warren could stay and I would just—slip away.

Next to Warren, I felt like I was on a clipper ship

lifted out of the water by the powerful wind-breath

of my two distant coastal families; my warring

mother and “blood” father, her lovely

companionable family in Los Angeles and Manhattan;

his friendly, compliant relations in Manhattan and Bensonhurst…

I dreamt both families were jammed on the deck

of the ship, waving, gesticulating, shouting,

and that I clung to a raft’s rope as a great

wave flung me back and back, but the truth

was I wasn’t sure I wanted to be near.

I wanted to fly apart—in the nowhere—.

When our two-door Chrysler Windsor

edged off the gravel onto the highway

I thrust my head right where the plush fabric

of the front seat parted like the Red Sea,

and said to my new dad. “You know what.

I love Warren more than I love you.”

“You don’t know what you’re saying,” he snapped.

“He’s just a little putz, and I can get

rid of him with a snap

of my fingers. Presto. See. Now—where is he?”

The seat beside me was empty. I was empty.

And my heart pounded in wild longing for its fullness lost.

I should have kept my mouth shut

but I thought my heart would burst

with that secret locked in it: why doesn’t he

understand? It wasn’t that I loved him less than I had

but that I loved Warren more. He had the same reaction

several years later, in Chicago, when I announced

my love for Carol, a round-faced, soft spoken blond girl

I’d brought home to play with my electric trains and drink

hot chocolate one brutal winter afternoon. I loved her and

I kissed her in the elevator on the way up.

I wanted him to say: I’m so happy for you,let’s put on some 45’s and dance.

He said, “You don't know what love is.”

And for the first time slapped me in the face.

I wrote my “blood” father of my love and he wrote back

he was glad I was “making friends out there.”

Why didn’t these men understand, I know what words mean,

by love I meant love, however transitory.

One word, two fathers, two red stone faces,

unblinking, dismayed.

"
"

Dropouts

 

Mace had the kind of courage you could easily mistake

for brawn. I don’t know why I call it courage.

 

Sure, he stood up to greasers. And didn’t visibly fret

on the days when his report card made hard fact

 

of what was already apparent from his absences.

Yet Mace was gifted with an uninflected quickness, a fine

 

intelligence of his own despair, a knowledge—

as he gunned the engine of his once white ’58 Chevy,

 

with a four-on-the-floor he’d installed himself,

to climb higher into the hills above the city—

 

of where nowhere was…

Light shadow cutting brusquely across the canyons—

 

                                                             *

Like everyone else in our class, Mace was a year

older than me. He had stubble on his chin.

 

I dragged a razor up and down my cheeks

to inspire fast, early growth.

 

“Don’t shave your jowls,” friends warned,

knowing I overdid everything,

 

“or you’ll grow hair there later.”Later was a word I disdained, its insistence

 

on the future tense, postponement—

life on the back burner.

 

                                                              *

 

Mace seemed incapable of worry.

His coolness and insouciance made girls stare.

 

He was always brushing back the shock of raven-

black hair that fell over his right eyebrow.

 

The same teacher who sent me lickety split

to the principal’s office

 

would lean over Mace’s desk and whisper

warmly, compassionately in his ear.

 

They would nod together. I could fill in every blank.

“What’s the matter Richard?”

 

“Nothing.” “If you’re having trouble,”

this is where the whispering grew most intense,

 

“I want you to feel you can talk to me as a friend.

Your work in class is so good, you have so much ability,

       Richard…”

 

Mace would never protest, never defend himself.

Indignation was a country where he’d never been.

 

“You may hate me,” I thought, praying she would not

double the insult of the absence of her concern

 

for me with a glance in my direction,

“but deep down Mace and I are the same.”

 

                                                             *

 

Mace and I were running into the same problem

at the same time. Mathematical

 

wizards that we were we couldn’t solve

advanced algebraic equations in our head;

 

we were vexed by an added integer.

We had gotten this far without lifting a pencil.

 

History was being sold to us as a dead language

of fixed events and we wouldn’t buy.

 

What is a fact, I wondered, and I could see

the same question wrinkling Mace’s brow.

 

                                                              *

 

Mace’s problems weren’t academic. His disgust thrummed

like telephone wires in the wind, even his saturnine

 

presence was deceptive, like his beat-up Chevy

with its secret store of power concealed under the hood.

 

Mace too began the year in the front row,

placed there on the strength of pure ability.

 

He sank slowly, buoyed as I was, by the one

assigned book we read, Great Expectations.

 

Mace attended to his tasks in the classroom.

I dreamt of escape via the window’s easy access.

 

There were unknown roads to be driven, gulleys

to be plumbed; girls: a world of lovely distractions.

 

                                                             *

For all the years I lived in Salt Lake City

I can’t remember seeing a single bird.

 

I felt watched in Salt Lake City ever since

that first day when the old geezer stepped

 

out of the shadows, on a street vast and empty

and without verticals, to reprimand my Double-

 mint gum wrapper for lighting in the gutter.

But only around the time of Hitchcock’s The Birds

 

did I start to withdraw from sight.

I was keen to see The Birds the Wednesday

 

afternoon it opened and I wanted the other—“good”—“Mark R.,”

the irreproachable blond Mormon angel everyone loved, to join us.

 

Our growling engine brought his mother to the porch.

The sun glared on her helmet of curlers.

 

Mark had “homework and chores,” she said, he “can’t come down.”

But he had already descended. And stood framed in the doorway.

 

I couldn’t get accustomed to the light

in the trampled meadows around his house,

 

the glow of dandelions, thistles, weeds.

Mark’s red cheeks reeked of aspiration and I could read

 

his thoughts: why couldn’t I wait until night?Why was I dragging myself down?

 Why skip history and rifle assembly?The movie would wait.

 

But I would not. I was keen,

and, seeking a purging terror to cleanse

 

me of my dread, I sat alone with Mace

in the vast empty theater alive to each

 

click and flicker in the projection room,

and the radiant impalpable dust

 

caught in the unstinting beam;

released from the limits of our world

 

until the screeching stopped

and, looked at askance by strangers,

 

we stepped into an iron dark

which held no trace of the light we’d left. 

 

                                                              *

I forked over whatever change I had

to fuel each day’s free-wheeling splendor.

 

One morning, knowing Mace was down to smoking butts,

I brought a pack of my mother’s Kents

 

as an offering. Mace scorned them.

He only smoked Marlboros.

 

Yet later, desperate and broke in the maze

of roads through the hills overlooking the city,

 

he broke off the filters and smoked in silence.

I was used to doing the talking

 

for the two of us but this was different.

He pulled up besides a long driveway.

 

A vaulted roof jutted above columns of tall firs.

This was where he lived. He’d be

 

“a sec”—he had “some smokes” stashed in a drawer.

I followed him past the plaster jockey and the massy trees

 

toward an opulent, utterly contemporary house,

fronted by oak door and gold bell-knocker,

 

angular, white, high-ceilinged, skylit…

Our apartment could have fit into the living room…

 

Now I understood: Mace lived in the clouds.

Though I couldn’t see beyond the back yard

 

through the landscaping I knew what the view

must be like: that was the reason to live there;

 

for the nights, when the city, innocent as it was,

still blazed through its grid of interlocking lights.

                                                               *

 

On May Day, Mace and I, long ago tossed

out of R.O.T.C. for “insubordination,”

 

but required to attend the final show-of-arms

sat together in the bleachers,

 

in splendid isolation, and watched

as the rule-followers—led

 

by the many-striped, other Mark R.—

in their woolen khaki uniforms,

 

shouldering their M 1 rifles,

dropped like flies in the insuperable heat.

 

"
"

because a box is a box: humans are cultivated

into said box without choice or clarification, specimens

only existing—as in: (you—i—us). flesh & frame—

restricted bone matter comprising a box reluctant

not to be a box. but nurtured inside the box, let’s say

form which is shaped by & indigenous, to, the box &

the creator of the holy box—only leading to another

question about, of course, the infamous box—form

turns deceitful inside the box like any [thing] caged,

leaning to a non-empathetic approach steeped in revolt

—is judas in waiting. note: the box is not universal

nor the universal. whatever hopes of otherworldliness

lies in the box itself. the box will not elongate, dissolve

or vanish without reaction to an action & here within

lies problem of perspective as in—there is none—zero.

along time’s continuum, color, too, is encouraged

for the sake of the construction of the box, which

is precious as flickering light, but cannot be verified since

darkness is the original concept of all things human.

"
"

korea might be gay but I do not think you are.

korea is a peninsula. you and I are people meaning that

we have hair we comb and things to look at. our lips

pout and take on the fullness of an adopted meaning. 

the fact of the matter is that relentlessness is a hand-

shake, a limp fish or glass of lukewarm tea. the fact of 

the matter is that standing on a stage everything is

comic, meaning small and memorable, of the insubstan-

tial ""universe,"" a minor disaster or floating chord. 

the darkness is outside when I see you, not in. 

I laugh when the funny thing gets said, and mostly I

laugh inside. on the inside is without curves and artifi-

cial spaces, many of them not gay or korea. but when I 

see you they all run and speech is maybe stammer,

sometimes slur. 

margaret cho, your tongue might wreak more havoc

than in speaks, outside being from the vantage point of

escalating stairs, from dark glasses and escapades. the

vantage being from a great height, a lighter space on

the inside that was formerly before the dark and laugh.

we really wait for the funny things before they are said

and let go for ever after. 

margaret, there are many funny sisters and there are

many porn stores. I too think woo lae ok is really petri-

fied of its own fish. that there are babies and there are

dykes, that this little piggy has something, that a pubic

mound transforms into a public space, not being gay or

with outstanding curves, prayerful and abashed, facing

the tide, grown over, rediscovered in the woods by

strangers and haunted for years and years.

"
"

a perfect symmetry

of both parts animal, feline and quizzical, and man,

              made

(undone) sworn in stormed again

electric, transmitted from the foreground into

               appropriate weather

the skin being elastic cause for several considerations

contrite ((argued over)

aren't we of beautiful tangents

beautiful ox blood, black sand

morning from small wire filigree, a gesture

"
"

we aren't differentiable with bangs and hooded lids.

I know the likeness doesn't stop right there.

what's so great about being horny? the joke is insatiable.

it rips and roars between and through. 

we both have found our mother's jewels.

buried in closets, rolled in silk thread and bunting. 

done in scarlet, fortunately found, never for the men

            in sharing.

these are our secrets. our punch lines and couplets.

I went to bed thinking ""pixies."" the bliss and after-

             math of a spiritual kiss.

how you resonate without rooms, maintaining perfect

             valences. 

where is the disaster at the end of this dread?

in my dream state you were queen, a reigning

            bodhisattva without a sprig.

I climbed inside your belly. punched inside you

            laughed and laughed,

converting persimmons into a freedom jelly.

Slathered all over, I found us exuberant,

happy to swing or go both ways. 

 

"
"

And yesterday something shattering happened.

Not yesterday, but several (that’s becoming

a favorite word) weeks ago I came across

Kitaj’s The Jewish Rider and wept:

there he was in the very image of my stepfather;

the pate where a few strands of hair still frolic,

the same skinny legs, the same misguided

attempt to dress in a sporty way (who’s

watching?), the same abstractedness,

the same shlumpy—boneless—posture, gazing not

at the landscape flashing past

with wires lashed to the treetops as if with one

tug the countryside would vanish,

or listening to the tick of the rails,

but fixed—distractedly—on his lower extremities,

white loafers and the crease in his pants and nylon

socks to see whether or not he should roll them up … ;

no: looking both beyond and through physical space

into an inner dark. Why else draw the eyes as shadows?

It’s his glimpse into another world.

 

                                                                *

 

My mother’s father hunted and rode.

        My father rode and fished.

My stepfather never budged

        from his Barca Lounger

once the amber liquid began to pour. He had a spiritual life

and a social life and no

        physical life. But he liked it

that I was always outside:

        maybe that’s why he never

got on my back about grades;

        he might have thought

that this boy has to be outside

        at this time in his life. 

Maybe it’s more important

        that he roam the canyons and the hills 

that he know the streets 

        that he come home 

covered with leaves and bark and mud,

        than that he sit there 

like a good young scholar 

        like I was, a Rabbi 

at twenty giving money home

        to my parents in their cabbagy tenement 

in the Bronx. This is a boy

        who needs space. One time—

I think I had my learner's permit—

        he rented a Mustang

convertible in L.A. and for several

        days I drove around

past the long rows of used car lots

        and the bruised facades of restaurants

digging up relatives, my hoarse-voiced

        arthritic aunt in the shadows of

her goldenrod colored ranch house,

        limping like Ruffian

after her last run

        in the wet dirt at Belmont Stakes.

       

                                                                 *

 

But I’ve said nothing about what made me weep.

 

It's in the contrast between Kitaj's alter cocker

seeking comfort on a train,

and Rembrandt’s taut youth

setting off into the rampant amber on horseback;

it’s in the image of active life juxtaposed

with the image of sedentary contemplation—

though no one travels on horseback now

and heroism has become

attending AIDS patients

or sheltering the homeless.

The raw youth’s feet are planted

lightly yet firmly in his stirrups.

His coat glows with many colors.

 

Not so The Jewish Rider.

And yet—there's something more.

 

                                                             *

 

Michael Hoffman writes that New York

is not what it was when I was too young

to have marked the existence of The Blue Note,

but I can pick up this trail

by walking across the park to the Frick.

And Barbara Hershey wouldn’t have been at the Frick in 1959

(they don’t allow children under sixteen)

in black skin tight pants, black sweater,

(the female uniform of our generation

whose male version substitutes

black jeans, baseball hat, and bomber jacket—

though who knows what decorous garments

she’d checked in the cloakroom),

and white boots with plenty

of Elizabethan ruff at the edges,

pausing to look at The Polish Rider

while I scribbled notes. Her white

boots stood out against the dominant dark

like the Jewish Rider’s white loafers.

 

And that was good because the light in the painting is brief

whatever the time of day, sunrise or sunset,

and the rider’s gaze, looking out over

unknown space, is inward.

I followed his eyes through the archway toward canvases

where clouds roll over harbors

against the whiteness of sails

or toward gilded robes and velvet-hung rooms,

then back to meet wisdom’s bared breast

in Veronese’s Wisdom and Strength…

(Why didn’t Veronese have the nerve

to call his painting Woman

With Bare Breasts, like Tintoretto?

Why an allegorical title when the bare

flesh and bones and sinew would have done?)

He spends his life looking not

at far off hills or citadels or

the lights in the village below:

he has no choice but to fix

on her one bared breast, her swelling nipple.

I can’t figure out what landscape

he might be facing in the painted world.

The clatter of rocks and hooves

echoes over the stony plain.

 

                                                                 *

 

I was no rider, but a pretend

horse and rider always rode

beside my train window—at a canter

no matter how fast the rails clicked by—

and though he wore a bandana

and leaned slightly forward in the saddle

to pull himself aboard,

his gaze, wide-ranging yet intent,

was like the Polish Rider’s.

 

Even as an only child I was never lonely.

 

My mother's father rode until he was old

and on a narrow pass his horse

jammed him up against rockface.

In his narrative of his life

this collision marked

the ruin of his hip

the rise of his cataracts.

 

My father rode “every morning before work.”

 

I never witnessed that,

but at a ranch in upper New York State

while I bloodied my hands

tugging the reins of a frothing giant

who would not budge from a weedpatch,

I watched him disappear

in his black polo shirt and khaki jodhpurs

as he galloped over a far off hill:

more at ease in the saddle—in the air—

than I’d ever seen him in civilian life.

 

My woman friend in El Paso lives to ride.

 

Only the Jewish Rider and I do not ride!

 

                                                                  *

 

That’s the stuff of events. What about

the signature inscribed by the sun,

the dark clouds sinister in just being there;

thresholds, exchanges going on in the village below,

candles lit in the deep interiors,

bread, wine, the plate making its way

around the table; what about—

 

leaping centuries ahead—

the energy from generators blazing

like auras through the clouds

the scattered lights,

the rotating tops of ambulances;

the tuna casseroles and macaroni and cheese

 

making the rounds, apple sauce

passing from high chair to bib, the Wonder Bread

on a calcified plate,

children eating, heads down, in silence,

communicating through eye movements,

the mother wiping her lips, the father

grinning stupidly and drooling;

 

the television quacking in the background,

the perfect suburban night unfolding

in bedroom and drive-in and den,

the sprinkler system ticking.

The snipers in the tower—.

This is what the riders,

guests everywhere and nowhere,

 

say goodbye to as their horses break into a canter

as night comes down. And last

night, driving to Connecticut,

I understood that the Polish Rider

gleans the permutations of light after dusk,

that its olive-gray smudges reflect

the absence of pitch-darkness. I was wrong

 

about the Polish Rider all along:

he doesn’t depart at nightfall, he stops for a moment

crossing difficult terrain (anticipating rockslide?)

in the night, because, as the faint light

rimming the edges of the sky makes clear,

night is not absolute black, but rough-hewn and curious.

The rider lives in order to depart.

 

 

                                 The Woman Who Rode

 

She hitched her horse to the gateposts of my house.

Bare trees, frost, the whole bit.

 

I wanted our lives to be like that:

as rife with silences as a Quaker meeting.

 

She came to me in her stride.

Dropped her crop on the chair.

 

Peeled off her britches and boots; crawled

under the covers.

 

Her hour in the saddle had “made her ready.”

I felt like an accessory.

 

The wound was open. Drowsily I rolled

onto her, no longer caring if she

 

was using me. As the new

year wore on and black ice made riding

 

a fast track to certain death

or paralysis, she grew tense.

 

Came to me now with clinical terms,

“schi” words I worked hard to break down.

 

The good news was she was not a true

“split personality”—the glitch

 

that “she was divorced

from herself, and could not love or care.”

 

                                                                  *

 

The light in her house

was like the light before dawn.

 

On the last of my rare visits

her mother jarred preserves while we watched

 

instant replays of Robert Kennedy die and die.

Her father skulked upstairs, perhaps

 

testing gadgets; or wishing me off his daughter;

or taking precautions I would not overhear

 

what words were ricocheting

on his “hot line” to the patent office.

 

                                                                 *

 

Any objective observer standing back

from the distraction of the impinging present

 

could see that her torment overleapt

any visible signs and that she was—

 

as a WASP “rider”—the wrong

person for the place she was in.

 

Her resilience could not be in question.

She lived to stray from known paths

 

to leap stone fences and break into open fields.

When her horse went down in an Irish bog

 

and she was trampled—hooves branding her cheek—

the next day she up and mounted him again.

 

                                                                *

 

When she came to me in the dream last night

her smile had loosened.

 

How lovely she looked in her blue silk blouse.

How well it lit up the colors of her hair.

"
"

Under the roof is the empty room

papered in requiem blue.

 

Partiers crowd the burned kitchen,

gold fixtures hook to cheap lath.

 

What is it they can tell you about absence

how it abates, takes names

 

Becomes a wall with windows

faced on a formal garden, content

 

To accept the thin rain. The syllable

forgives the words that need it, a sentence

 

Badly written, epigraphs scrawled

thoughtlessly in books. Book where the hero

 

confronts a dark riddle, book where

the suitors stand at the gate and are stumped.

 

What force brought them forward

stooping at the lintel, up the chipped steps

 

To the blue door in the unbuilt tower,

half-built, the new stone.

"
"

I can’t get rid of useful things

and nobody wants to pick them up,

I keep forgetting where I lay my umbrella.

 

I don’t leave footprints in the snow anymore,

we haven’t had a war on domestic soil in so long

I wonder if I still got it. Because once I had it.

 

I heard about a boy who once tied a string to his brother,

he tied his brother to the ocean and the ocean to the blackbird—

 

from the ground all the birds look like blackbirds

from the ground a Stealth Bomber looks like a spaceship.

 

The aliens are coming,

they walk through birthday parties

and basically go unnoticed.

 

And this is kind of how I go through life,

once I heated up a spoon in the microwave

the fish have so much mercury in them they spark.

 

I was handed a bayonet from the Civil War

and a copper penny corroded with rust.

When they take the Statue of Liberty apart to clean her

her neck explodes with a million little spiders.

 

Meanwhile in a forest somewhere

someone cut open my grandmother’s belly

and filled it with bricks

 

something is coming soon

I keep a bucket of lambs blood

by the front door.

"
"

Like nights we knelt on the dirt floor

of a dugout, leaned our heads back,

eyes twitching gone, and popped nitrous

canisters into the communion shapes

of our mouths, slipped inside where

everything seemed to be falling snow,

ice, the time split between chasing flies

through a darkened park and sprawling

in sycamore bark—how clean that abyss

we drifted in, like dew, more like pollen,

on our skins; and, beneath, a want

for touch, a kiss, a return. Like nothing

back then, to break an arm latching on

to the bumper of an Impala, or settling back 

as the car took us as far as the salted bridge,

before letting the ride go with a mitten

caught behind the chrome waving

from the other side of the river. Like this, 

you said, sliding a needle, watching

dope plunge, the body's rush and tow

until you felt something like an angel

hovering above, but it was only pigeon

feathers deviling the air. Those friends

are gone: some dead, dying, locked up

or jailed in themselves; and when I see

some kids running in the heat of a taillight

swirling behind them, I remember we

wanted only to quiet our bodies, their 

unnatural hum, a vague pull inward,

some thin furrows gliding over the snow. 

"
"

All of us were boys only some were taller or already in high school, and almost

      nothing else

mattered but to learn some new trick,

to pull off something we saw in a skate video, wind cutting 

around our bodies when we flew

off the lip of a ramp, grabbed the board and twisted

into a 180, kicking 

a leg out and landing it, the only way to run

through the neighborhood

was to run through it

together, flipping off cops and skinheads, I almost

don't even remember girls but a vague sense of the taste of bubble gum

and how they smelled so different

from us, sitting in some kid's basement drinking

his parents' vodka, we grew out our bangs, moved in a pack,

jumped in when some one of us 

got jumped,

so when a man we had never seen before

came up and started beating on Simon, one of us dropped his skateboard, walked

over to the man

like someone walking into a bank

and stabbed him.

The man, startled, sat down, right there on the asphalt,

right in the middle of his new consciousness,

kind of looking around. 

"
"

My mother and I are on the front porch lighting each other's cigarettes

as if we were on a ten-minute break from our jobs

at being a mother and son, just ten minutes

to steal a moment of freedom before clocking back in, before

putting the aprons back on, the paper hats,

washing our hands twice and then standing

behind the counter again,

hoping for tips, hoping the customers

will be nice, will say some kind word, the cool

front yard before us and the dogs 

in the backyard shitting on everything.

We are hunched over, two extras on the set of The Night of the Hunter.

I am pulling a second cigarette out of the pack, a swimmer

rising from a pool of other swimmers. Soon we will go back

inside and sit in the yellow kitchen and drink

the rest of the coffee 

and what is coming to kill us will pour milk

into mine and sugar into hers.

"
"







One of the very first Indian words to enter the English language was the Hindustani slang for plunder: ""loot.""

WILLIAM DALRYMPLE







   It sits with a fork made from a lotus on an ivory chair eating an elephant steak in the company of bears and feral nautch girls on a monsoon evening incandescent with an appetite as mighty as railroads spann’d across seas and reclines, its cheeks burnished, its ass varnished by suns setting on bronze and sugared with saltpetre, its torso a tableaux for the annals of rectitude, the theatre for roiling or robust passage, a veritable Suez Canal towards missionary victories which thrust from such bejeweled and oiled loins anointed by coin— that emission of plump plums, lump sums into the Ganges, that coiling coy virgin maiden winding her languid locks, batting her lashes to its lashes— its spine a gentle wire. Supine, its belly swells with salt and figs with meat and treaties, it corks open a profound song— itself it sings into books heavy with truths on the chair dressed with leather and raw hides kissed by ox blood smeared with beef dung lined with raw silk woven from worms plucked from boughs basted across its pious beaming eyes its spidery ghosted lids, and its byzantine glance unmoors from its Chinese porcelain and crosses the ebony table polished with lac secreted from the cloaca of the kerria lacca set with glazed cakes eaten by pinked mouths wearing crimson robes, to its guests polished and glossed and stained by the ooze drawn to color the uncolored raw linen, the wood, the human. Then its wrist cuffed by gold and cowries and studded with coral draws a whisper- thin muslin veil dyed carmine— sucked from crushed scale of cochineal boiled in ammonia and bled into curds and rouge glinting sanguineous and turbid between bug and rug snug a thug in redcoat or a turncoat carrying urns of this stuff— from estates of cocoa coconut calico— across its face while soft éclairs of chocolate bumble out from its plumed rump choked with gum and linseed flax and cassia cinnamon and pepper like so many lines of blood underwriting the mutton and not the goat so it can sell them with a name of a place like scarves or garlanded whores moored to wharves suckled by mother of pearl or teas named after Earls and they with whole scores to settle settle for homemade cures nettles ginger turmeric— a paste or to taste—and it steals and seals in letters scented with sandal sent abroad waxed and pressed with cornelian gems honed from ground it owns and makes stone from their flesh ekes ink from their sweat soaks indigo in lye fermented with time and makes color so it can bid for its own passage, the passage, O of this soul, to India!   

"
"







There once lived a great king whose twin wives could bear him no children. A wandering sage saw the king’s grief and offered him a magical mango. She who ate the mango would be with child. As he had two wives, the king cut the mango into two perfect halves and offered one half to each wife. After nine months, each wife gave birth to one lifeless half. Horrified, the king ordered these clots of flesh to be left in the forest. A wandering demon found the two lifeless halves and cupped one in each palm. When she brought them together, the two halves fused and a whole child was made in front of her eyes—the demon named the child Jarasandha.


Years passed by and this child grew to be an intimidating and invincible warrior. In a fight with Bhim, an equally invincible warrior, Jarasandha was ripped in half by his enemy. But, each time he was ripped apart, his halves found a way to meet up and become whole. Krishna, who witnessed how Jarasandha’s flesh found its own way back to flesh, motioned to his own cousin with his fingers: toss the halves of his body in opposite directions, he


suggested.


So, when Bhim ripped Jarasandha apart once again, he swung his left half to the right side of the arena and his right half to the left. And his body found no way to return to itself.


In the Toronto airport, where I’ve arrived for a conference, I watch an older Punjabi lady—made to sit in a wheelchair behind two lines of customs officials, a security guard, a translator, and a service-staff member—scream that her son is outside the airport may she please just go tell him she is here she is here she is here please. I stand there holding her hand, my own luggage reluctantly traveling in loops on the belt. Beta—child— she says to me: please tell them my son is here and I am here what is the problem let me go let me go to him.







"
"

  In the epilogue to The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Alex Haley recounts meeting a pensive Malcolm at the Kennedy airport, watching newly immigrated children “romping and playing” in their sudden home. “By tomorrow night,” Malcolm says to Alex, “they’ll know how to say their first English word—nigger.”

Before cable television arrived in India, America was a white nation. I imagined New England snows dusting California and Miami’s beaches stretched across Appalachia. America was a papier-mâché parody patched together by a cheaply hired prop maker. Geographic accuracy was sacrificed to the interpersonal dramas of Betty and Veronica, and the American banquet was limited to the malted and fried offerings in Pop’s Chock’lit Shoppe, where the Riverdale gang solved the real geopolitical problems of how to get Reggie off Moose’s back with the help of Archie’s fumbling charms. Here, class warfare came with a side of fries. There were rumors of distant family members “settling” in “North Dakota” or “Oklahoma”—names that put themselves together like Lego castles: hard-edged and jutting out with an abrupt L or a particularly pokey K.

Blackness was just a rumor too. Blackness flickered in the background of photographs they sent back from these mysterious locations: here’s an uncle waving at us from a glittering Times Square (Los Angeles); here’s an aunt waving at us mid-way through the soft-focus neon breakfasts with Aunt Jemima’s maple syrup (made from maple leaves); here’s a nephew waving at us next to the poster of a red and white Michael Jordan in a quilted bedroom, his rotund brown body snuggled in tie-dye and tucked into tartan flannel sheets. Blackness was a rumor, that is, until Michael Jackson’s Bad ripped into our consciousness and suddenly, knobby-kneed pre-teens found a way to make stringy curls with coconut oil stolen from their mothers’ kitchens and started moonwalking backwards into my Social Studies classrooms, all snappy crotch and jaunty limbs. We girls rolled our eyes but we kept on watching.

It wasn’t long before Jackson’s unsparing gaze, draped in slick black leather, began replacing the glowing pastel Ganeshes and Saraswatis hanging above study desks. But replacing an elephantine god’s soft paunch with lean, mean celebrity did not save us from our own ignorance of how blackness and brownness were connected through a struggle for economic self-realization and human rights. While kids in Chennai were rehearsing Michael Peters’ signature choreography for “Thriller” and pretending to be zombies—little exemplary half-dead spectacles—Union Carbide was industriously shirking responsibility for the Bhopal Tragedy, which choked thousands of Indians to death, and black mortality was spiking in violent, homicidal protest of the US DEA’s drug buys and cocaine busts.

In other words, Tamilians blinked away Michael Jackson’s blackness. We kept the heat and thunder of his fat synth bass, which found its way into Ilayaraaja’s electric disco in films of the late 1980s like Vetri Vizha and Agni Natchathiram. We kept the ebullient automation of his moves, which became a muscular theme in Prabhu Deva’s blend of baggy breakdance and whimsical terukoothu folk dancing in the 1990s. But we forgot his blackness. In time, the lightning of his presence was replaced by the grey hum of CNN, Cops, Law & Order, and the dull horror of handcuffs on dark wrists. Posters yellowed, cassettes spooled out, and my moonwalking classmates found their scientific calculators and study guides again.

But the rumors of racial difference in George Bush Sr.’s America continued to bloom and wilt in morose cycles in my childhood homes into the 1990s. In damp clusters, it grew like moss under rocks. Rootless, it stretched its stringy arms and held us by the ankles; it grew like mold between bathroom tiles; it spun itself fine and strong, webbing into corners where our brooms couldn’t reach. In time, the mossy rocks lined our after-dinner walks past the hibiscus bushes. In time, a grandmother slipped on the bathroom tiles and stayed in bed, fed conjee by a fatherless girl brought in from the village and the moss grew between her toes and drew her into the earth where they buried the nameless pets and tossed the chicken feathers. In time, the spiders hung so low they fell into pickle jars every time a child fished for a gooseberry or a slice of stony green mango from the brine. And from this brine, in time, we learned to believe that it existed. And as Tamilian families began drifting from the flashy monsoons of India to the June gloom of the California bay or to the sharp wet summers of the Keys, they carried the damp and stench in suitcases and buried it in hushed conversations. They made a poultice of moss and spider web and lodged it in the prayer books, hung it around the children’s necks like a talisman, and they said—as long as she doesn’t marry a black man.  

"
"

It was hard to sit there with my father,

watching one of my sister's girls playing

a set of tennis against my son or daughter

because he'd forget himself and with a groan

of disappointment or a grunt

of sympathetic exertion make it clear

that he was rooting for my sister's child

and against mine. There was no use

calling him on it, because he'd deny it

and get angry. So I would get angry

but try not to show it, until I couldn't

stand it any longer and would get up

and walk away. That was how it worked

between us, the unspoken building up

like thunderheads above the tennis court,

where the kids played on, not caring who won

and hardly noticing the sky had darkened.

 

"
"

There goes the

aluminum, the antimony, the arsenic

the barium, the cadmium, 

the cesium, the gadolinium

the lead

the mercury

the nickel, the thalium, and 

the tin. 

There goes that job spraying lawns

with chemicals, driving the Merc

three-quarter ton 

with a tank on the back

and no brakes

through West Vancouver, bouncing

the wheels against the curb

to stop

and on the steep

majesterial streets

that afford such views

that they could hire

two talentless dickbrains

to weed and feed

front and back

and back again 

in two weeks. 

That was a heavy metal job

that probably killed

a lot of salmon too. 

There goes the shotgun

pellets from the pheasants

we shot out in Abbotsford and Langley

plucked and hung

in the concrete basement

in New Westminster

fresh

with the stink of pheasant guts.

Oily, delicious pheasants

roasted always

with a little buckshot

after a day off. 

There goes those summers painting

houses with my brother

wire-brushing off

the old paint, breathing

it in on the wooden ladders

white guys working

on a tan

and saving up for the Peugot

ten speed. There goes

the seventies

out from my body.

Led Zep Humble Pie Burning Spear, and

Marley too, adidas, big E Levis 

from Lee's Men's Wear on Sixth Street

there goes that brown house

paint, broken down 

and pissed out. 

There goes those years

beachcombing along the Fraser

from New West to Lulu Island

pulling out cedar blocks

that had floated free

from the shake factory booms. 

Pulling the blocks out

of that industrial muck

grey green and foamy 

down near Scott Paper, the mill

that Larry worked in until

it moved

production south. 

Then stacking and drying the blocks

to split them into shakes

with a birchwood

hammer and an adze. There goes

that industrial mix

from the Fraser 

from the riverbank

from the bars by the river.

There goes sucking on

a hose to get some gas into that

golden sixty-six Valiant convertible

with the leaky roof and

the 273 and putting it

right into the carb to sputter

the piece of shit to life

Again. Still, pretty great 

to have a convertible with a radio

(turn the radio on 

roadrunner roadrunner!)

and a five-gallon gas can

and a piece of garden hose

and a mouthful of

Regular, a mouthful of

Regular Leaded

from the Chevron

in the strip mall across Tenth Ave.

There goes working

on a printing press

under the sidewalk

of the storefront at Cambie and Hastings

that was later the Caribbean place

and is now

going to be gentrified.

There goes that time. 

There goes all the shitty renos

on Broadway, on Hastings, on Commercial Drive,

there goes the dust

from that wall Mike took

down with a chain saw

when Talonbooks was above the foundry

and there goes the foundry dust

and the sweep of chemicals

that would take your head off

like six beers later at the Waldorf. 

There goes the mystery

unmarked jars of cleaners and solvents and grease

that Larry nicked from the mill

and we used on the cars and bikes

and on our hands. 

There goes that job at the self-serve

Shell with a car wash across from the college

when it was in temporary trailers

just to show that education

for the masses

was taken seriously.

And there goes, hopefully, the dust

and everything from that week 

in September

when what was stored in the three

buildings of the World

Trade Centre was pulverized

and burnt Into the air

and Nancy and I stayed in the apartment

with t-shirts tied 

over our mouth and nose

and didn't go out until

we went to Milano's

where the Fireman drank for free

with the IRA guys

leaning at the bar. There goes

that time. 

There goes the

Aluminum, the antimony, the arsenic

the barium, the cadmium, 

the cesium, the gadolinium

the lead

the mercury

the nickel, the thalium, and 

the tin. Broken down

pissed out. 

There goes those jobs, those times

there goes those relations

of inside and outside, of work

and nerves and fat and soft tissue

and synapses. 

There goes that set of relationsinside and outside. There goes that body

that use and surplus"
"

Someone has opened a giant map

and with the tips of our fingers,

each of us suddenly blind,

we track the black cold of this monument

for names we know

like finding a route home.

 

Lost here

this damp spring morning,

the cherries exploding like the fourth of July,

we wonder how many maps of Viet Nam

sold those years,

so many strange sounding places.

 

One of us holds a magnifying glass

to McCarroll, McMorris, McNabb,

small print in the polished stone,

the way a neighbor, say, in Neoga, Illinois

might have done, late at night

searching that faraway land on his kitchen table,

 

hearing again the morning paper

thump against the front door,

that boy on his bike in the dark

grown and gone—what was his name,that kid from down the block?—

Khe Sanh, Da Nang, Hanoi.

 

--for PFC William ""Willie"" Searle

 

"
"

Though the doctors said no salt,

salt was all my father craved.

His body bloated, skin water-logged

and gray, still he wanted potato chips,

honey-baked ham, greasy slabs

of Polish sausage from Piekutowski's.

He begged for pepperoni pizza,

garlic butter, ribs slathered in sauce.

But when I did the shopping,

I searched only for labels that saidlow sodium and no preservatives, instead

bringing home heads of broccoli,

turkey burgers, shredded wheat.

And when he died anyway,

guilt gnawed me like an ulcer—

how could I have denied him

his few final pleasures?—

until I found Big Mac wrappers

stuffed under the car seat,

jars of pickles in the hall closet,

and hidden among wads of tissues

near the night stand, his stash—

a half-used canister of salt.

I sat down on his sagging mattress

now stripped of stained sheets

and studied that blue label

with the girl in the yellow dress

holding her umbrella against a rain

of salt still falling from the sky.

 

"
"

I’m your guide here. In the evening-dark

morning streets, I point and name.

Look, the sycamores, their mottled,

paint-by-number bark. Look, the leaves

rusting and crisping at the edges.

I walk through Schiller Park with you

on my chest. Stars smolder well

into daylight. Look, the pond, the ducks,

the dogs paddling after their prized sticks.

Fall is when the only things you know

because I’ve named them

begin to end. Soon I’ll have another

season to offer you: frost soft

on the window and a porthole

sighed there, ice sleeving the bare

gray branches. The first time you see

something die, you won’t know it might

come back. I’m desperate for you

to love the world because I brought you here.

 

"
"

my daughter says. Unless the car could float.

Unless by car you mean boat. Unless the ocean

turned to ice and promised not to crack.

Unless Greenland floated over here,

having lifted its anchor. Unless we could row

our country there. Our whole continent

would have to come along, wouldn't it? Unless

we cut ourselves free. What kind of saw

could we use for that? What kind of oars

could deliver one country to another?

She asks, Why is Greenland called Greenland

if it’s not green? Why is Iceland called

Iceland if it’s greener than Greenland?

Unless it’s a trick, a lie: the name Greenland

is an ad for Greenland. Who would go

promised nothing but ice? Who would cut

her home to pieces and row away for that?

"
"

Because a lie is not a lie if the teller

believes it, the way beautiful things

 

reassure us of the world’s wholeness,

of our wholeness, is not quite a lie.

 

Beautiful things believe their own

narrative, the narrative that makes them

 

beautiful. I almost believed it

until the new mother strapped

 

her infant to her chest, opened

the eighth-floor window,

 

and jumped. My daughter tells me,

after her preschool field trip

 

to the Firefighter Museum,

about the elephant mask, its hose

 

like a trunk, and the video of a man

on fire being smothered in blankets.

 

She asks me if she knows anyone

who got dead in a fire, anyone who

 got fired. When will I die? she asks.

When I was a child, I churched

 

my hands, I steepled my hands,

and all the people were inside,

 

each finger a man, a woman,

a child. When I die, will you

 still love me? she asks. The mother

cracked on the pavement—

 

how did the baby live? Look,

he smiles and totters around

 

the apartment eight stories up.

Beautiful things reassure us

 

of the world’s wholeness:

each child sliding down the pole

 

into the fire captain’s arms.

But what’s whole doesn’t sell

 

itself as such: buy this whole apple,

this whole car. Live this whole life.

 

A lie is not a lie if the teller

believes it? Next time the man

 

in the video will not ignite.

The baby will open like a parachute.

 

"
"

I carried my fear of the world

to my children, but they refused it.

 

I carried my fear of the world

on my chest, where I once carried

my children, where some nights it slept

as newborns sleep, where it purred

but mostly growled, where it licked

sweat from my clavicles.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and apprenticed myself to the fear.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and it became my teacher.

I carried it, and it repaid me

by teaching me how to carry it.

 

I carried my fear of the world

the way an animal carries a kill in its jaws

but in reverse: I was the kill, the gift.

Whose feet would I be left at?

 

I carried my fear of the world

as if it could protect me from the world.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and for my children modeled marveling

at its beauty but keeping my hands still—

keeping my eyes on its mouth, its teeth.

 

I carried my fear of the world.

I stroked it or I did not dare to stroke it.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and it became my teacher.

It taught me how to keep quiet and still

 

I carried my fear of the world

and my love for the world.

I carried my terrible awe.

 

I carried my fear of the world

without knowing how to set it down.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and let it nuzzle close to me,

and when it nipped, when it bit

down hard to taste me, part of me

shined: I had been right.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and it taught me I had been right.

I carried it and loved it

for making me right.

 

I carried my fear of the world

and it taught me how to carry it.

 

I carried my fear of the world

to my children and laid it down

at their feet, a kill, a gift.

Or I was laid at their feet.

"
"

She was my Sunday school teacher

when I was just seven and eight.

He was the newly hired pastor,

 

an albino, alarming sight

with his transparent eyelashes

and mouse-pink skin that looked like it

 

might hurt whenever she caressed

his arm. Since Eva was her name,

to my child’s mind it made great sense

 

that she should fall in love with him.

He was Adán. Before the Fall

and afterward, her invert twin.

 

And she, Eva, was blonde as well,

though more robust, like Liv Ullmann.

I loved her honey hair, her full

 

lips; her green eyes a nameless sin.

(Not that I worried all that much—

the church was Presbyterian.)

 

In Sunday school, her way to teach

us kids to pray was to comment

on all the beauty we could touch

 

or see in our environment.

My hand was always in the air

to volunteer my sentiment.

 

Since other kids considered prayer

a chore, the floor was usually mine.

My list of joys left out her hair

 

but blessed the red hibiscus seen

through the windows while others bowed

their heads. Her heart I schemed to win

 

with purple prose on meringue clouds.

—For who was Adán, anyway,

I thought, but nada spelled backward?

 

While hers, reversed, called out, Ave! Ave! The lyric of a bird

born and airborne on the same day.

 

But it was night when I saw her

outside the church for the last time:

yellow light, mosquitoes, summer.

 

I shaped a barking dog, a fine

but disembodied pair of wings

with my hands. She spoke in hushed tones

 

to my parents. The next day I would find

myself up north, in a strange house,

without my tongue and almost blind,

 

there was so much to see. This caused

Cuba, my past, to be eclipsed

in time, but Eva stayed, a loss.

 Ave, I learned, meant also this:Farewell! I haven’t seen her since.

 

"
"







In art, politics, school, church, business, love

 or marriage—in a piece of work or in a career—

strongly spent is synonymous with kept. 

                                                              —Robert Frost







She taught me the names of flowers: calendula, ranunculus, Iceland


poppy. And the medicinal uses of herbs: Fenugreek opens up a


stuffy head; goldenseal lubricates the cracked mucous membranes.


Over a circa 1820 American dropleaf table, she told me asparagus


was the broom of the kidneys. I hadn't understood at first and


thought she'd used a German word I pictured as brüm and not as the


little stalks standing on their heads, sweeping out the impurities. I


learned to make the perfect roux for soufflé and became her


efficient assistant in the kitchen—dicing and chopping, she once


told me, with unparalleled patience. Then one day she began to


accidentally break my Depression glassware, and I recalled how


she'd giggled when she told me that in two years of marriage she


had single-handedly decimated her husband's glass collection


dating from 1790 to 1810, including a rare wedding goblet. In the


doorway to the back porch she stated simply that my presence


made her feel strangled, it was nothing I was doing or could do. We


saw a therapist for six years, while my collection dwindled then


became memory. With unparalleled patience I jumped through


hoop after burning hoop, the therapist pointed out, but I heard that


as praise for my prowess and continued to balance Bauer plates on


my nose on command; hold growling tigers off with Windsor dining


room chairs; juggle career, job, hope, and nightly tempests with


unparalleled dexterity. I could reassemble anything: shattered pictures


of us crossing the street with canes in the future, my hand under her


elbow. My heart. But what I lacked, I can see now, was the ability


to dissemble. Finally, she brought home a Cuisinart food processor,


and I started hearing the minutes slicing away with ferocious velocity,


time doing its soft-shoe faster and faster like Fred Astaire on


amphetamines. Memories of flowers and herbs were sacrificed to


the angry god of its vortex. Your voice is like acid on my skin, she


said after twelve years, then grabbed her Cuisinart and left me


behind like so much history.

"
"

V.

                                                  A.

There are no doors between the rooms. The archways bore

through the house like a tunnel through a mountain. The room

one falls into after my parents’ is the largest and serves as two

bedrooms divided by an invisible wall. Half of it is my brother’s

and the other half my sister and I share, but not at first.

 

Earlier, I have a bed to myself on the side of the room nearest the

kitchen. My bed is low and on one side a wooden rail can be

dragged up noisily and clicked into place.

 

          It is here my little goat wakes me, grabbing the covers off

          me with her teeth. We play in the empty pig shelter at the

          far end of the patio while my mother washes clothes in a

          palangana and throws the soapy water across the concrete,

          where it steams.

 

          But my father is a butcher by profession, and my family

          has other plans for my goat: a Sunday picnic at the zoo in

          Havana. The day is huge and blue and breezy. My sister

          teases me for not eating and says my goat is delicious. I

          stray away to watch the monkeys.

 

          I give one of the monkeys near the fence my banana. As it

          finishes peeling it meticulously, another monkey appears

          behind it and shoves the banana into its own mouth. The

          first monkey turns around, slaps it in the face with the

          empty peel, but that monkey isn’t sorry and starts jumping

          and screeching and showing its yellow teeth.

 

          For many years, those monkeys are all I can remember

          about the picnic at the zoo.

 

 

                                                  B.

Later, when my sister and I share a bed on the other side of the room,

I can see the tall narrow cabinet right inside my parents’ room. My

father always puts his hat on top of it as he walks in. And at night,

through the mosquito netting, it is a tall thin man wearing a straw

hat, lurking just outside the door, watching me in a sinister way. The

dead weight of my sister’s habitual leg thrown across my body is no

talisman. I have to keep waking myself up, sweaty and tense, to

make sure he hasn’t moved any closer.

 

"
"







Regla lesbia: Flexible rule that may be adjusted to any

body to be measured. Compare regla fija: standard. 

                                                    —The Velázquez Dictionary







I.

In the garden, it’s there. Even when you’re inside you feel it,

as though it were you standing naked among the weeds,

 

the tips of the bougainvillea bursting into flame, your nipples

ruffled like the skin of a lake by a breeze.

 

You worship the invisible body like an old-fashioned lover, from afar,

loving the specificity of space between you.

 

Sometimes at night it stretches out on the empty side

of the bed, stares at you with the length of its invisible surface.

 

Every contour of your body not filled by you is molded

by the attentiveness of the invisible body, whose breath surrounds

     you.

 

It’s more than prayer it wants—more than language, with its

     conditions.

The invisible body demands you invent new senses to receive it,

 

new places on your body to marvel at its subtlety,

like the eyes of the deaf percussionist that perceive sound.

 

II.

The invisible body wants you to become a satellite dish,

tuned to what exists only because your body calls to it.

 

Like the woman who had her kitchen remodeled to make room

for the microwave she’d entered a contest for. Then won.

 

III.

When asked whether falling in love was about acquisitiveness,

about the ego, the seventy-five-year-old poet

 

responded that the ego had nothing to do with it;

it was the need for union with the beloved.

 

Rumi asks, Who is it we spend our entire lives loving? 

 

IV.

How, then, do you measure the invisible body,

which resists commitment but is faithful?

 

Is it clear who the beloved is, when no clear

body exists that can be measured against a standard?

 

V.

The invisible body sometimes acquires a body—it’s so convincing,

it takes you a while to figure out it’s really the invisible body.

 

Like someone who has been reading your journal,

it has decoded from your petty, daily complaints the open sesame

 

that slides the stone from the hidden cave’s opening

and cleans you out while you sleep, leaving a sarcastic note.

 

It wants you to know it was doing you a favor, besides,

how else did you think you’d discover the cave’s precise location?

 

When Aphrodite sharpens you, you sacrifice a little of yourself,

willingly, as a knife does, so that you may become better at it.

 

VI.

This is the point at which the invisible body speaks

in italics, the Ouija board of poetry.

 In my mind, says the invisible body, that time capsule shuttlingthrough space, I hold, in all the languages of the world,

 your love, rushed like holographic platters to a table,steaming into the future long after you’ve ceased to shine,

 the silver faces of your beloved bobbing out of the darkness,the black velvet pillow of your life on which you offer them for view.

 

VII.

The invisible body is created out of your longing, your longing

compressing invisible molecules together into an absence you

     recognize.

 

That is the way one blind man sees the world—after the fact,

in photographs he took, once he had passed through it.

"
"

Recycled over and over

people born look like parents,

grandparents, sister or brother,

or perhaps a throwback

from an earlier ancestor,

the hawk nose, a hard ridged forehead,

the cleft in the chin or a blue birthmark

on the arm, the stomach,

the dainty fresh bum of a newborn

each unique like a snowflake never

can you guess what’s on their mind

sometimes I can feel what they’re feeling

detect it like hairs on the back of my arms,

together we live, talk, walk the same sidewalks,

to die buried in a foreign cemetery

for others to sit upon ponder their

own light, why am I free, what must I do,

does someone love me like I do,

new skin gives way to wrinkles,

hair fades to gray, bones grow strong

then decay, strength seeps every time

one pees, sleeps, ages, loves,

muscles grow then shrink the body

a temporary vessel destination unknown.

 

April 28, 2002

"
"

If the ashes of Mark Twain

lie in the Mississippi River

then I’m sure he does rise up some days

emerge from dark polluted depths

to walk over water to land

and scans the horizon for change

being a curious sort,

he sees the crisis rise again

another war on the horizon

and shakes his craggy head to say no not again

he hopes truth-sayers still exist

who don’t have to wait until their dead.

 

December 2002

"
"

A blue anchor grains of grit in a tall sky sewing

I inch and only sometimes as far as the twisted pole gone in spare colors

Too late the last express passes through the dust of gardens

"
"







                          Outside

                                                outside myself  

                                                                                  there is a world,

                          he rumbled, subject to my incursions

                                          —William Carlos Williams, Paterson







i. 

impossible. 

sterile extrusion

the rigour of its beauty

its crumpled geometry

worked to defeat.

light, stopped.

locked in its form

shuttered and windless

in dry rifts,

split, furrowed, mottled, creased.

ii. 

trundling

bulging from behind, 

its too heavy body

its natural carapace

shelving green,

sinking the sea beneath it

the difficulty piling up,

rising to the surface. 

iii. 

swirling backward

on blue flowering currents

rolling up

sudden, in spray and mist

—like the turning of a page

that leaves us blinded for a second—

unlocked in a milky scum

half hid, long on its axis

growing open wounds

of violet, emerald, silver.

a point of astonishment.

lapses of silence. air.

"
"







from Pia Arke's exhibition Arctic Hysteria at Greenland's 

National Museum & Archives, Nuuk, 2010







i.


I am in my body. I am here, in front of you. I am the temperature in this room. I am undressed in my nudity; I am the light and shade you feel. I am more like other people than like you. I have before and after. I am my self, entirely and only. My outside and inside are continuous. I am muscle, organ, fluid, bone. I am monumental. You are the only one who sees me. ii. 


I am not naked as I am; I am naked as you see me. I am transparent, almost visible. I have a time and a place. I am tribal and exotic. I must always carry objects. You are heroic. I am a complete museum, the story of my own making. I am a mirror to you; you are reflected in the looking at me. At best, I mimic you. You write me. When you leave, I will no longer exist. iii. 


I am a single conscious point. I am indifferent. I am unself, like a photogram. I am prehistoric, before definition. Your body falls over me. I have depth and luminescence. I am neither here nor there; I have infinite extension. I live inside the lived world, the light and dark inside my head like dream substance. I am camera obscura, the room itself. I both adore and resist. 

                "
"

GUITH

              a greylag morning,

              the sea a conscious blue.

CALF SOUND

              orca

              in a sea blue room,

              breathing pearls that rise to the surface.

GROATHA

              the plenum of the shed:

              every part infilled with flutter,

              glass, sheep turd, gusts of damp.

GREENTOFT

              gunshot punctures a field

              of geese, their clackety rise

              a flock of helicopters.

THE SETTER STONE

               an old man steps out of the ground

               all lines and angles,

               sun snagged in his beard. 

MILLCROFT

              a tree softened house:

              red willow, alder, pine,

              eucalyptus rooting.

WARNESS

              a stream hole

              a pure, dense fall; 

              one ocean falling into another.

PLANTATION

             wren, silver lark, crow

             woody snipe, curlew, hen hawk

             day owl, starling. 

SOUTH END

              the Varagen, beaded with spotlights

              curves through the dark

              round great holes in the sea

WARD HILL

               climbing with the moon,

               the wind blowing round my mouth—

               a low note, like an owl. 

 

"
"

One face looks out from all his canvases,

One selfsame figure sits or walks or leans:

We found her hidden just behind those screens,

That mirror gave back all her loveliness.

A queen in opal or in ruby dress,

A nameless girl in freshest summer-greens,

A saint, an angel — every canvas means

The same one meaning, neither more or less.

He feeds upon her face by day and night,

And she with true kind eyes looks back on him,

Fair as the moon and joyful as the light:

Not wan with waiting, not with sorrow dim;

Not as she is, but was when hope shone bright;

Not as she is, but as she fills his dream.

"
"

Three sang of love together: one with lips

   Crimson, with cheeks and bosom in a glow,

Flushed to the yellow hair and finger tips;

   And one there sang who soft and smooth as snow

   Bloomed like a tinted hyacinth at a show;

And one was blue with famine after love,

   Who like a harpstring snapped rang harsh and low

The burden of what those were singing of.

One shamed herself in love; one temperately

   Grew gross in soulless love, a sluggish wife;

One famished died for love. Thus two of three

   Took death for love and won him after strife;

One droned in sweetness like a fattened bee:

   All on the threshold, yet all short of life.

"
"

It's a weary life, it is, she said:

Doubly blank in a woman's lot:

I wish and I wish I were a man:

Or, better then any being, were not:

Were nothing at all in all the world,

Not a body and not a soul:

Not so much as a grain of dust

Or a drop of water from pole to pole.

Still the world would wag on the same,

Still the seasons go and come:

Blossoms bloom as in days of old,

Cherries ripen and wild bees hum.

None would miss me in all the world,

How much less would care or weep:

I should be nothing, while all the rest

Would wake and weary and fall asleep.

"
"

I tell my secret? No indeed, not I;

Perhaps some day, who knows?

But not today; it froze, and blows and snows,

And you’re too curious: fie!

You want to hear it? well:

Only, my secret’s mine, and I won’t tell.

Or, after all, perhaps there’s none:

Suppose there is no secret after all,

But only just my fun.

Today’s a nipping day, a biting day;

In which one wants a shawl,

A veil, a cloak, and other wraps:

I cannot ope to everyone who taps,

And let the draughts come whistling thro’ my hall;

Come bounding and surrounding me,

Come buffeting, astounding me,

Nipping and clipping thro’ my wraps and all.

I wear my mask for warmth: who ever shows

His nose to Russian snows

To be pecked at by every wind that blows?

You would not peck? I thank you for good will,

Believe, but leave the truth untested still.

Spring’s an expansive time: yet I don’t trust

March with its peck of dust,

Nor April with its rainbow-crowned brief showers,

Nor even May, whose flowers

One frost may wither thro’ the sunless hours.

Perhaps some languid summer day,

When drowsy birds sing less and less,

And golden fruit is ripening to excess,

If there’s not too much sun nor too much cloud,

And the warm wind is neither still nor loud,

Perhaps my secret I may say,

Or you may guess.

"
"

I never said I loved you, John:

        Why will you tease me, day by day,

And wax a weariness to think upon

        With always ""do"" and ""pray""?

You know I never loved you, John;

        No fault of mine made me your toast:

Why will you haunt me with a face as wan

        As shows an hour-old ghost?

I dare say Meg or Moll would take

        Pity upon you, if you'd ask:

And pray don't remain single for my sake

        Who can't perform that task.

I have no heart?—Perhaps I have not;

        But then you're mad to take offence

That I don't give you what I have not got:

        Use your common sense.

Let bygones be bygones:

        Don't call me false, who owed not to be true:

I'd rather answer ""No"" to fifty Johns

        Than answer ""Yes"" to you.

Let's mar our pleasant days no more,

        Song-birds of passage, days of youth:

Catch at to-day, forget the days before:

        I'll wink at your untruth.

Let us strike hands as hearty friends;

        No more, no less: and friendship's good:

Only don't keep in view ulterior ends,

        And points not understood

In open treaty. Rise above

        Quibbles and shuffling off and on:

Here's friendship for you if you like; but love,—

        No, thank you, John.

"
"

She stands as pale as Parian statues stand;

Like Cleopatra when she turned at bay,

And felt her strength above the Roman sway,

And felt the aspic writhing in her hand.

Her face is steadfast toward the shadowy land,

For dim beyond it looms the light of day;

Her feet are steadfast; all the arduous way

That foot-track hath not wavered on the sand.

She stands there like a beacon thro' the night,

A pale clear beacon where the storm-drift is;

She stands alone, a wonder deathly white;

She stands there patient, nerved with inner might,

Indomitable in her feebleness,

Her face and will athirst against the light.

"
"

1.

I was born on a Tuesday in April.

I didn't cry. Not because I was stunned. I wasn't even mad.

I was the lucky egg, trained for gratitude

inside the belly for nine months straight.

Two workers welded bunk beds at the end

of the delivery room. One on top of the other.

My universe might have been the white lime ceiling,

or the embodiment of Einstein's bent space

in the aluminum springs of the bed above

that curved toward the center.

Neither cold, nor warm.

""It was a clear day,"" my mother told me.

It's hard to believe

there were a few romantic evenings

when I was conceived, a buzz in the retina

and red-laced magma

decadently peeling off

a silver candlestick.

Infants' cries and milk fever

turned to salt from the stench of bleach—

abrasive, unequivocal.

With a piece of cloth wrapped on the end of a stick,

the janitor casually extends the negative space

of the black-and-white tiled floor

like a mouth of broken teeth, a baleen of darkness

sieving out new human destinies.

 

 

2.

1968. At the dock, ships arriving from the East

dumped punctured rice bags, mice

and the delirium of the Cultural Revolution.

A couple of men in uniform

cleared out the church

in the middle of the night.

The locals saw the priest in the yard

wearing only his underwear, shivering from the cold.

Their eyes, disillusioned, questioned one another:

""Wasn't he the one who pardoned our sins?""

 

Icons burned in front of their eyes,

icons and the holy scriptures.

Witnesses stepped farther back,

as if looking at love letters

nobody dared to claim.

 

Crosses were plucked from graves. And from each mouth

spilled irreversible promises:

mounds of dirt the rains would smooth down

sooner or later.

 

Children dragged church bells by the tongue.

(Why didn’t they think of this before?)

Overnight, the dome was demolished, instantly revealing

a myriad of nameless stars that chased the crowd

like flies on a dead horse.

 

And what could replace Sunday mass now?

Women brought cauldrons into the yard.

Men filled up their pipes; smoke rose

into the air, against gravity's pull.

Nails in worn out shoes exposed stigmata

that bled in the wrong places—

a new code of sanctification,

of man, by man.

 

 

3.

""Read!""—I was told. Who said that?

Angel Gabriel, or my first-grade teacher

who had dark roots underneath her bleached curls?

 

Language arrived fragmentary

split in syllables, spasmodic

like code in times of war.

 

""Continue where your classmate left off!""

A long sentence tied us to one another

without connotation as if inside an idiom.

Someone would get to read the noun, another the verb,

a third one a pronoun. . .

I always got the exclamation mark at the end—

a mere grimace, a small curse.

 

A tall cast-iron stove below the portrait of the dictator,

puffing smoke from its temples, enough heat for everyone.

On the blackboard,    

leftover diphthongs from yesterday or the day before

rubbed against one another like kittens.

 

After dusk, I looked for another language outside the window,

my eyes glued to a constellation

(they call these types ""dreamers"")

my discovery possibly a journey into the past,

toward a galaxy already dead, nonexistent,

the kind of news that needs millions of years

to reach me.

 

""Read!""—the angel shook me for a third time

her finger pointing to an arbitrary word

a million light years apart from its object. (It didn't matter who

       was first).

Negative space sketched my onomatopoeic profile

of body and shadow in an accidental encounter.

 

 

4.

Language is erosive.

It makes us recluses,

a wind through the canyons

carving our paleontological eras

for everyone to read.

 

Under the revised testament of my skin

bellows a gold-cast bull, an alluring object,

a need for attention.

Then comes the unleavened bread and a last supper,

which, remarkably, is repeated several times

between ice ages.

Lower yet, Sodom.

I recognize it from the stench of sulfur.

 

I hold my nose. Freud would have done the same.

And then Cain,

a crow taught him how to bury his own brother. . .

And at the bottom,

Adam’s gentlemanlike sin

under which scientists

discover earlier epochs of famine.

 

Between unidentified layers,

wanderings in the sand, the search for a new prophet. . .

 

I try to understand my people.

Their language is plain. Some words,

were actually never uttered, like pages stuck together

in a book fresh off the press

and long after it sits on a shelf.

 

This, too, lives inside me

within insidious bubbles of air, negative

spaces where I can find little historical rest,

but also where utter ruin may originate.

 

5.

Little left of the snow three days ago.

Its blanket ripped away, exposing

dog shit and the bruises of routine.

 

Negative space gives form to the woods

and to the mad woman—a silhouette

of the goddess Athena

wearing a pair of flip flops,

an owl on her shoulder.

 

It’s minus zero. The factory’s gate gnashes its teeth

behind the back of the last worker. Blowing noses, shivering,

     mucus. . .

A virus circulates through the workplace,

secretly, intimately touching one person after another,

a current of sensuality.

It softens the tone.

But nothing unites them more than their frailty,

The one-sizes-fits-all shoes you must grow accustomed to

By filling the extra space with cotton,

Or curling your ill-fitting toes.

 

6.

In Halil’s yard,

rules were sacrilege.

His eight children entertained themselves

by carrying famine on their shoulders,

recalling St. Bartholomew’s flayed skin.

Starving, filthy, hazel-eyed—

three qualities that unexpectedly coalesce

in the bright light, strung together like sneezes.

 

One’s famine was another’s consolation.

“Look at them! It’s a sin for us to complain.

They’re even worse off than us!”

But even Halil found his own consolation

in the old woman Zyra, “barren and paralyzed,”

the root origin of despair.

 

This was our highlands landscape,

hierarchical, where each family

would make out a different expiration date

on the roof below their own.

 Schadenfreude was the only river

that could turn mills.

 

But if this hierarchy shifted,

and our roof gave signs of ruin,

my mother would plant tulips in the garden,

white tulips, our false image,

a scarecrow to keep predators away.

 

 

7.

Nearly nothing was mentioned in the letters he sent from prison,

just two lines, on top of the page:

“I am well. . .” and “If you can,

please send me a pair of woolen socks.”

 

From them, I learned to read between the lines:

negative spaces, the unsaid, gestures,

insomnia that like a hat’s shadow

fails to shade your chin and ears.

 

And in the photographs’ white background,

acrophobia adds to the color of their eyes: blue,

green, gray, and ultimately, chesnut brown,

as, earthward, we lower our gaze.

 

I learned to read the empty spaces the dead left

behind—a pair of folded glasses

after the reading’s done and discourse commences.

 

Or the musical chairs game called ""love,""

where there are less empty seats than people.

If you don’t want to be the last one standing

you must predict when the music will stop.

(Who, though, has really succeeded?)

 

Perhaps a little practice can be useful in this case.

I don’t mean squatting, jumping, stretching,

but listening to the same music every day from the start,

the same miserable vinyl record

so that you’ll recognize its cracks

before it recognizes yours.

 

 

8.

Midnight. Snoring,

meaningless sounds that stain the side of the wall

that belongs to no one.

So where are we? What dimension?

Who foots the bill at a time like this

without lambs or sinners,

when even angels record nothing?

 

The street’s clearly visible

under the neon 24-hour-service sign

above the funeral home.

There was a music shop next to it

that closed down a few months ago;

the shop shared a wall with the funeral home,

shared the same water pipes and the same gate to heaven.

But the coffins won,

the wide-shouldered coffins that narrow down

in the shape of a mummy, not a human.

Wood of the highest quality, swears the owner,

and pure silk inside, pleated like a stomach

that can digest even a bulldozer.

 

When asleep we're simply five limbs. Starfish.

If you cut one limb, it will grow back.

Even a single limb could recreate us from the beginning,

     a single hope.

Negative space is always fertile.

 

 

9.

No one knows if it was simply a matter of mixed

or some other reason why I used to see

what I wasn't supposed to see—

the ending of things.

It wasn’t a mystical gift, but like a blood clot

in the darkness of a vein, I held on to reason,

as it circulated from the bottom up

and not the other way around as we were told.

I used to start from the edges

and with my left hand or a croupier’s stick

gather the balls and dice from the corners

and then watch the bettors

as neither a winner nor a loser.

There's nothing sillier

than watching a film in reverse

where after the climax, the protagonists

are replaced by circumstances,

and circumstances replaced by minor characters,

their tongues plastered behind a single, fatal smirk

Life and my short lunar calendar slipped away

like carbon paper sending off as much light as necessary,

skipping the details, the contrast and sharp colors.

Lunar time is short. Until the actual end,

there are years enough, the negative spaces.

What to do with them when the verb

has already been uttered, a conclusive sentence

with Latin syntax, or more than that:

didactic.

"
"

I grew up in a big house

where weakness and expressions of joy

deserved punishment.

And I was raised on the via politica

with the grease of yesterday’s glories,

a thick grease collected under arctic skies.

I was lit up. My notebooks, my hair, my heart reeked of

smoke.

 

That’s when we saw each other clearly.

Or rather, what remained of us.

Damaged like lottery numbers

scratched away with a blade.

 

How different we were!

 

Those with round faces were righteous;

those with narrow faces were cautious.

 

One listened secretly to Puccini,

another to silence, the music’s music.

The oldest one declaimed monologues

inside a ten-by-ten-foot cell

he had built for himself.

 

And the mysterious one

simply had diabetes.

 

But how similar we were in severe circumstances!

 

Alarmed like a flock of magpies

that the smallest stone sends into the sky

toward the mouth of the abyss.

 

Then it became obvious there wasn’t enough space for everyone.

We separated. Some went on living in via verbum,

telling of what they knew, what they witnessed,

and so, through their narrative,

creating their own grease.

 

The others crossed over the ocean.

 

And those in particular who went farthest away

never speak of their annoying history

of wretched survival, burying it

in the darkest crevices on their being.

Unfortunately, as with perfume, its scent

lingers there for much, much longer.

 

"
"

Among the personal objects inside a 2100-year-old Chinese tomb,

archaeologists found nine acupuncture needles,

four gold and five silver.

Long before knowing why,

ancient doctors knew that pain

must be fought with pain.

 

It’s quite simple: an array of needles pricking your arm

for a properly functioning heart and lungs.

Needles in the feet to ease insomnia and stress.

Needles between your eyes to fight infertility.

A little pain here,

and the effect is felt elsewhere

Once, a group of explorers set out to plant a flag on the South

      Pole,

a needle at the heel of the globe, in the middle of nowhere.

But before the mission was completed

a new world war had begun.

The impact of the needle was felt in the world’s brain,

in the lobe responsible for short-term memory.

When Russia used ideology as acupuncture—a needle over the

     Urals—

it impacted the pancreas and the control of blood sugar:

America paid tenfold for whiskey during Prohibition,

and at post offices, copies of Joyce’s

“immoral” Ulysses were stored for burning.

The universe functions as a single body. Stars form lines of

     needles

carefully pinned to a broad hairy back.

Their impact is felt in the digestive tract, each day

a new beginning. How can you begin a new day

not having fully absorbed yesterday’s protein?

I was a child when my first teacher

mispronounced my last name twice. That pricked me

      like a needle.

A small needle in the earlobe. And suddenly,

my vision cleared—

I saw poetry,

the perfect disguise.

 

 

"
"







""The wild will keep calling and calling forever in your ears. You

cannot escape the 'little voices.'""

—Frank Wild







1.

Here I rest, in South Georgia.

A few feet of evolution away

lie the graves of whale hunters, pointing north.

A white fence shields them from elephant seals

and their apocalyptic screams that each day warn

of the end of the world, or maybe the beginning. . .

 

I survived five expeditions to the Pole.

The one before last, “Imperial Trans-Antarctica,” nearly killed me.

For two years I put up with the ice—no man can reap or sow

       these fields.

And, unlike farmers, I didn’t even need to ask God for rain,

because ice is sated

and more desolate than the Sahara.

 

I survived distance. Wrote one message after another

beginning with a capital letter and a ""PS."" at the end.

My own personal post office under my pillow

closed for two years already, on holiday.

 

I survived six month-long polar days and nights;

to this day, I don't know which one was worse.

 

My epitaph is simple. Carved in granite:

                         FRANK WILD

                         18 April 1873

                         19 August 1939

                         “Shackleton’s

                          Right Hand Man”

From those cast away here

by a defect in the engine of the ship

or nostalgia of the womb.

 

2.

Ah yes. . . in the beginning was the ship. The ship stuck in ice.

      Endurance. 

Ships are women. They prefer soft seas.

In the best-case scenario, she’s called La Santa Maria 

and she throws you, like Columbus, on some foreign shore.

 

But if you get too close to her. . .

 

The very day after

we washed her deck with warm water and soap,

warmed her arteries with gin,

stroked her lower back with our surrogate songs,

shaved our beards and exposed the illiterate lines on our faces,

she took off.

 

And from the shore,

we saw how she broke her ribs, sinking,

aft first, so fast we didn’t even have time to pray,

leaving behind her ash-tree fragrance

and faux pearls on the water.

 

“Such a woman!” someone laughed bitterly,

“She knows when to leave so as not to be forgotten.”

 

3.

A woman, naturally, has no business there.

Antarctica is a masculine continent—

male penguins keep the eggs warm,

the moon stands up on the street to urinate

after being kicked out of the tavern,

the cold like a cut-throat razor, dulled for three thousand years,

and the sled dogs, the Huskies,

we kill with a single bullet

so they won’t starve to death. In this way

we instill a little character into the new land

before the arrival of Conquistadors, thieves,

assassins, missionaries, prostitutes,

the first invading army of every continent.

 

Antarctica is a man’s continent,

because only a man chooses to break into the darkness of the mind

by conquering the body,

as Amundsen and Scott did, their glory

reaching to the apex of ecstasy.

Zero degree of geographical latitude,

utter collapse.

 

4.

Hunger is overestimated. The stomach functions much like the

     brain:

when it has nothing to think about, it feeds off memories.

It can last three days just thinking of a single biscuit.

But those who have a better memory, meaning a much stronger

     acidity,

can go on for months

remembering a slice of prosciutto, two fried eggs,

sweetly folding their eyelids like napkins after a meal.

 

Then hallucinations begin. Banquets. Easter supper.

Feet move impatiently under the table;

the scent of rosemary wafts from a platter

and two clean serving hands with burns here and there.

That's when you feel grief-stricken

and you attack the seals and penguins with your

alpine knives and shoes like a madman

in an empty amphitheater.

Or is this, too, a hallucination,

and in this case not ours

but Antarctica's?

 

And when clarity finally returns,

both stomach and brain

notice only their own deep wrinkles.

 

 

5.

Blubber, blubber, seal's blubber.

Blubber that keeps your spirits alive, rendering it for fuel, for light,

blubber to mask the body's foul odor,

—a mixture of doubt, hope, and ammonia.

And if you have nothing better to do,

think of a cow's thigh hanging at the butcher's,

its delicate streak of fat

like a silk ribbon.

 

I survived even this sarcasm.

 

And every night, before bed,

we read recipes to each other

one of a few things we secretly rescued

from the ship before she sank,

as if these items were her lingerie.

 

What a show it was!

What pathos in pronouncing prosciutto, sugar, omelet!

What sensuality in milk, parsley, cinnamon!

We made these words up ourselves.

Nothing exists until its moment of absence.

 

But first, in order to warm up our mouths

like actors before going on stage,

we'd repeat mechanically, palates dry,

""Bless us, O Lord,

and this food we've received through your mercy.”

 

 

6.

It was the Romans who spoiled the word

studying rhetoric

before anatomy and mathematics:Vir bonus dicendi peritus

“The good man skilled in speaking"" (Marcus Porcius Cato)

 

But in Antarctica, words are measured differently: by calories!

With a simple greeting you lose five calories,

just as many to keep a fire burning for a full minute.

And a Ciceronian argument can consume a whole day’s

      nutrition;

think carefully before you open your mouth.

 

The word is overestimated.

 

Sometimes it’s enough to avert your eyes from your shoes

to imply “gangrene”;

and a vague exchange of glances between men

is enough to understand that the ice is cracking beneath your feet

and death is closer than your fingers.

 

7.

Stretched smooth from end to end—such is Antarctica. In fact,

even a baby’s skin looks withered by comparison.  

No emotions. No regrets. No warnings.

Either fight or die.

 

My father was like this more or less. A teacher at a village school.

In classrooms that smelled of sheep-wool pullovers

drying on the body. And eyes that moved freely

in their hollows, like toes

inside an older sibling’s shoes.

 

Unlike the Romans,

my father preached about justice and honor

his hands folded behind his back.

His shoulders seemed twice as wide

as his worn jacket.

 

I inherited his sharp, gray gaze

and his soft voice.

Eyes that say “Go” and a voice that says “Stay.”

You never know which one to trust.

 

 

8.

And mother? Oh, she was simply Captain Cook’s niece,

—the great James Cook—

from morning to night

when she washed, swept, dug potatoes from the garden,

fixed her husband’s tie on Sundays

even from her bed, while in labor.

She never spoke of this. As it wasn’t necessary.

People speak of what they have, not what they are.

 

She was a tailor. Measured everyone's perimeter with a glance;

erred only on the width of one’s neck, an unknown strength.

Her large scissors followed

the white chalk line on the cloth so precisely. ""Snip!""

She said little. Her silence followed the white outlines

of another tailor,

over a fabric much older than she was.

 

But now that I think of it,

how did the poor woman respond to her friends asking,

""Where is your son?""

""He's exploring the world.""

""And what does he bring back from there?""

""Himself, alive, I hope.""

""What's the point of returning empty-handed after two years?”

 

Was she at least a little proud of me? Of her Frank?

Certainly not. She was Captain Cook's niece.

The past always conquers.

 

 

9.

I was the first of thirteen children.

And as a rule, each of them

eyed one of my belongings.

One eyed my bed near the window

that overlooked the water where frogs lived

and asparagus grew on the shore.

Another eyed my green jacket bought with borrowed money,

poker cards, a fishing net,

my wicker chair with the damaged back.

Another whistled my favorite tune:

""What Will We Do with a Drunken Sailor?”

without reaching the refrain.

And yet another envied the basement

—that place I occupied in my father’s heart—

 with its elm door hanging by a single hinge.

 

But the time hasn't come to leave home just yet,

until your own brother begins to use your shaving kit

and dreams of the same girl.

 

 

10.

What shaving kit? Antarctica makes you grow a double-beard

as if you were a hundred-year-old grave.

And, while you remember wasting time waiting in line at

      barber's

another beard grows, a red one.

 

Here, each body part works for itself:

the stomach, hands, intestines, eyes. . .

The unity of the body is overestimated, too.

 

Only skin pulls everything together like a sled.

The skin? Which skin? Man loses his first skin

to his first love, like the snake early in spring

on a thorn-apple bush that blocks the way.

From that point on he stops counting the rest.

 

11. 

I don’t know why it was named “Elephant Island,”

when it answered the ocean with the cries of a she-wolf.

We could only make out her sly teats under her belly. After

      some time,

if she didn’t kill us first, we’d begin to cry like wolves ourselves.

 

Twenty-two people. Packed next to one another under two

      inverted boats

like notes in Bach’s “Come, Sweet Death, Come Blessed Rest,”

with more pauses, a dramatic suffocation between breaths.

A dry, calcic cough was a sign of life. Or the delirious mutterings

        of someone

dreaming aloud of “ice” in the middle of ice,

after they had cut off his toes.

 

But the hardest moment arrives in the morning,

when, with shut eyes and plugged nostrils,

as if drinking your own urine

you recycle the same lie for four months straight:

“Men, pack up your stuff! The boss might arrive today!”

 

And they obeyed me. Packed carefully each day from the start,

leaving nothing shap in the folds of their bags,

nothing that would spoil the line between fact and fiction.

 

It was a time when

routine grew more powerful than hope.

 

 

12.

Fish in the ocean toyed with our citizenship.

On the seventh mile, we left our medals behind, class ranks,

along with the dogs, potatoes, and a camera.

We made fire out of money

and kept only a single metal coin each

so that archaeologists might trace us more easily centuries later.

On Elephant Island, we had to bid farewell even to tobacco,

tobacco which reminded us of village alleyways

and walks home after midnight.

 

Time glided above us without touching a single strand of our

     hair—

nonexistent, as if gliding above ancient cities,

exposing the solemnity of our white bones

and crickets on absent walls.

 

That’s when the ten commandments deserted us:

“Do not steal,” “Do not lie,” “Do not covet,”

“Honor your parents”. . .

save one of them perhaps,

the one about the holiness of Sunday.

 

We already had nothing. We belonged to no one.

An entirely new species: HOMO ANTARCTICUS.

A scientific proof that “forgotten” and “free”

mean the same thing.

 

 

13.

Two years after returning from the world of the dead,

you find your house taken over by another tenant

and the rent tripled,

the commemorative plaque nailed to the gate:

“Here lived F.W.”

And your lover, or better, ex-lover,

for the same reason,

in the arms of another

three times more handsome.

 

You see your own image sold at an auction.

Artifact. Original. “Brrramp. Sold!” The price so high

you can’t afford it. But even if you could,

you're an illegal customer,

holding a death certificate in your hand.

 

And you find your parents turned into winter trees

their eyes fixed on a large cloud of plaster.

They don’t expect visitors. Best not disturb them.

Let their leaves fall quietly where they will

let the crow's nest remain in the armpit of a branch,

where it has always been.

 

Perhaps you should take a shortcut, start over.

Or you know what? There’s a war going on nearby, they say.

Go there instead!

But this time die better.

 

 

14.

War’s never satisfied with flesh;

Fresh, branded, smoked,

with or without blood

blue blood, dark, thick, whatever kind.

And frozen blood like yours

could store at minus 40 degrees Celsius,

viruses from 1914 unscathed,

and the map of the old Empire         

and Scott's hurt ego 

and old coins minted with the head of Edward VII,

and Browning’s poetry and the epic of the unknown,

like an envelope inside an envelope,

all making you the ideal candidate.

 

Back on the ship, ammunition everywhere,

sailing through the cold Northern seas

where you had to learn a new language.

A new language is like a fish:

first, you need to remove its spine

in order to chew it.

 

Unlike in Antarctica,

one’s purpose in war is clear: kill or be killed,

though sometimes it’s the same difference.

 

Baltic nights gave you what Antarctica refused you:

the other half of the celestial sphere.

You meet Vera, the widow of a tea plantation owner,

a character out of a Baroque novel, her pupils blurred with dusk,

and the ritual of mourning fitted perfectly to her body

like a final journey. 

 

 

15.

A man charmed by a glacier,

who knows too well the flawless forms of her body,

feels her eavesdropping gaze even when asleep,

her clean and distant breath

and her heart, a piece of ice, that melts inside a cigarette case

heated for drinking water,

finds it difficult to marry a real woman,

to marry Vera.

And Africa.

 

I bought land. Barren. Hundreds of acres. In Zululand.

I didn’t fare well with tobacco. Planted cotton instead,

chose bodily peace rather than meditation.

My nearest neighbor lived 45 miles away. White, of course.

And my fate, never blended with the blacks,

those beautiful statues, wrapped in straw.

I heard them nod off during lunch break,

like the oars of a boat,

in complete sync.

They knew where they were heading.

But I didn’t.

 

And I was right. It didn’t take long

before drought, floods, worms

destroyed everything. The bank left me only my own beard

and the malarial shadow of a baobab. Apart from other things,

Vera filled out divorce papers. The woman in the yellow dress,

yellow as quinine, yellow as the sigh of a hinge at dusk,

the woman married to the hero

who now can’t even manage a small plot of land.

 

 

16.

The man in front of me

—my master I call ""Boss""—

is newly shaved, and dressed in a striped tie and jacket

as if the Prince of Wales or Fred Astaire,

a style that arrives here two years late.

He asks me to serve whiskey to clients at the bar

and chat them up

using their jargon, gestures,

sentences uninterrupted by mosquitoes,

and the abstract rhetoric of the Depression years.

And, to be frank,

he pays me for the latter.

 

But what do I know,

what does a survivor know about the art of living,

for which new instincts are needed, new muscles

and other kinds of heart valves?

 

Furthermore,

how can I obey such a spick-and-span boss,

having known the smoky gods of Antarctica

who recognize each other solely by the nose

and can end rebellions with a glance

and count the deaths as members of the crew?

How can I take orders from a boss whose name isn't Shackleton?

 

 

17.

""Second in command,” “Lieutenant,” “Shackleton’s right hand”

 

What did she see so clearly in me,

my drama teacher in elementary school

when she'd always assign me the role of Father Joseph,

of Gaspar the Magi offering Jesus frankincense,

or of John the Baptist always there to clear the path?

What did she see in my metallic pupils, baritone voice,

      infrequent speech

as if scissors, bandage, and iodine

inside a first aid kit?

 

Under Antarctica's naked sky, each of us followed his own star.

Even the carpenter, his own heraldic calling.

You didn’t need much to feed them;

 just a few crusts of insomnia and the tents' punctured holes.

 

My star was weak; you could hardly see it

hidden behind another larger, troubled star

like a calm valley that appears behind jagged peaks

more attractive when absent.

 

 

18.

What happened afterward can be told in a few words:

I worked in a mine; earth’s warm heart,

happened to be crueler than her frozen brain.

I laid railroad tracks South, always toward the Unknown.

It was like playing only two strings on a violin: joy and sorrow,

fatefully blending at the horizon.

 

I repaired houses. Another waste of time.

I never understood their weak points,

just as you can't make out eyes from genitals or mouth

in some underwater creatures.

 

And when I was left penniless,

I gave lectures about Antarctica,

water gurgling in my gullet every five words, for those few

who listened patiently to an adventure of survival.

 

Then Bea arrived. Or sweet Beatrice.

It was easy to grant her what I had left in my heart

—that set of heavy museum keys—

with no fear she might lose them.

 

Tired lungs and liver

could barely follow my split image

of bust and bottle of booze.

Like a prophet in the last circle of Dante’s Inferno,

I carried my own decapitated head in hand.

 

My ashes were lost at the base of a church. No one

      thought of them.

It was a time of war. Another world war. The second

one not knowing what to do with her own ashes either.

 

19.

Some of us died in the war.  Others took to the sea again,

the gray, cracked waters of the South,

decks perspiring fuel and alcohol.

Our random itineraries. Full-time melancholics.

 

For months in Antarctica,

we waited for our shadow to return

and consumed that question you ask yourself only once in your

     lifetime,

the way one consumes chickenpox.

 

And the rest of the time,

we counted the scars left on our faces,

with a gesture you could call indifferent and epic,

or childlike.

 

"
"

Last time I saw myself die is when police killed Jessie Hernandez

                                      A 17 year old brown queer // who was sleeping in their car

Yesterday I saw myself die again // Fifty times I died in Orlando // &

                        I remember reading // Dr. José Esteban Muñoz before he passed

I was studying at NYU // where he was teaching // where he wrote shit

                        That made me feel like a queer brown survival was possible // But he didn’t

Survive & now // on the dancefloor // in the restroom // on the news // in my chest

                        There are another fifty bodies that look like mine // & are

Dead // & I’ve been marching for Black Lives & talking about police brutality

                        Against Native communities too // for years now // but this morning

I feel it // I really feel it again // How can we imagine ourselves // We being black native

                        Today // Brown people // How can we imagine ourselves

When All the Dead Boys Look Like Us? // Once I asked my nephew where he wanted

                        To go to College // What career he would like // as if

The whole world was his for the choosing // Once he answered me without fearing

                        Tombstones or cages or the hands from a father // The hands of my lover

Yesterday praised my whole body // Made angels from my lips // Ave Maria

                        Full of Grace // He propped me up like the roof of a cathedral // in NYC

Before we opened the news & read // & read about people who think two brown queers

                        Can’t build cathedrals // only cemeteries // & each time we kiss

A funeral plot opens // In the bedroom I accept his kiss // & I lose my reflection

                        I’m tired of writing this poem // but I want to say one last word about

Yesterday // my father called // I heard him cry for only the second time in my life

                        He sounded like he loved me // it’s something I’m rarely able to hear

& I hope // if anything // his sound is what my body remembers first.

 

"
"

Work out. Ten laps.

Chin ups. Look good.

 

Steam room. Dress warm.

Call home. Fresh air.

 

Eat right. Rest well.

Sweetheart. Safe sex.

 

Sore throat. Long flu.

Hard nodes. Beware.

 

Test blood. Count cells.

Reds thin. Whites low.

 

Dress warm. Eat well.

Short breath. Fatigue.

 

Night sweats. Dry cough.

Loose stools. Weight loss. 

Get mad. Fight back.

Call home. Rest well.

Don't cry. Take charge.

No sex. Eat right.

Call home. Talk slow.

Chin up. No air.

Arms wide. Nodes hard.

Cough dry. Hold on.

Mouth wide. Drink this.

Breathe in. Breathe out.

No air. Breathe in.

Breathe in. No air.

Black out. White rooms.

Head hot. Feet cold.

No work. Eat right.

CAT scan. Chin up.

Breathe in. Breathe out.

No air. No air.

Thin blood. Sore lungs.

Mouth dry. Mind gone.

Six months? Three weeks?

Can't eat. No air.

Today? Tonight?

It waits. For me.

Sweet heart. Don't stop.

Breathe in. Breathe out.

"
"

You can't fake it. You know when I fail

          to achieve the expected: palm the becoming-

                         comatose bullfrog, legs collapsing as they may,

and chuck it (we used to say) high as you can.

 

Let it fly stone-like to the skylight in the low

          dome of fog—another requirement of the game:

                    a foggy day and a bullfrog and you, Vincent.

The old code goes back and forth between us

 

as we take our turns, childhood pals, engaged

           by the game we once called Kamikaze—now,

                         a nameless ceremony. Nameless not because

a boy's play calcifies in a man's conviction;

 

not because, despite our promise, you've become

          a mid-rank fighter pilot, and I a minor poet;

                        and not because it's too unpleasant to name

what brings to hand that astonished muscle

 

only to leave it, later, sprawled on the current.

          The perfect toss sends the critter shattering

                         for an instant, beyond fog, into the invisible.

Disappearance is success. Once you said, ""My insides

 

tickle whenever it happens,"" and so I know

          you've been tickled five times, and I three.

                    That's the score; the score matters little.

The name is gone because we're from here,

 

and, being native, cannot visit how it is

         that an urge to which we tend tends to us—

                       how we are cruel, inscrutable, indefensible,

yet holy. How we send up bodies of praise from

 

our right hand, only to gather eventual elegies—

          flesh stunned still as words—in our left.

                    Once again the center of the heavens

is earth. We've thrown as high as we can

 

for as long as we can remember, only to await

          some return: a revelation, plummet, explosive

                         splash. So it is that two grown men

may stand again in stillness, awaiting word,

 

friends who glimpse for seconds at a time

          earth as it is in heaven, ankle-deep

                          in Rowan Creek with eyes uplifted,

reflecting the fog to the fog itself.

"
"

I look for you early,

my rock and my refuge,

         offering you worship

     morning and night;

before your vastness

I come confused

          and afraid, for you see

     the thoughts of my heart.

 

What could the heart

and tongue compose,

         or spirit’s strength

     within me to suit you?

But song soothes you

and so I’ll give praise

          to your being as long

     as your breath-in-me moves.

 

"
"

Send your spirit

     to revive our corpses,

and ripple the longed-for

     land again.

 

The crops come from you;

     you’re good to all—

and always return

     to restore what has been.

"
"

all my desire is here before you,

     whether or not I speak of it:

I'd seek your favor, for an instant, then die—

     if only you would grant my wish.

I'd place my spirit in your hand,

     then sleep—and in that sleep find sweetness.

 

I wander from you—and die alive;

     the closer I cling—I live to die.

How to approach I still don't know,

     nor on what words I might rely.

Instruct me, Lord: advise and guide me.

     Free me from my prison of lies.

 

Teach me while I can bear the affliction—

     do not, Lord, despise my plea;

before I've become my own burden

     and the little I am weighs on me,

and against my will, I give in

     as worms eat bones that weary of me.

 

I'll come to the place my forefathers reached,

     and by their place of rest find rest.

Earth's back to me is foreign;

     my one true home is in its dust.

Till now my youth has done what it would:

     When will I provide for myself?

 

The world He placed in my heart has kept me

     from tending to my end and after.

How could I come to serve my Lord,

     when I am still desire's prisoner?

How could I ask for a place on high,

     when I know the worm will be my sister?

 

How at that end could my heart be glad,

     when I do not know what death will bring?

Day after day and night after night

     reduce the flesh upon me to nothing.

Into the winds they'll scatter my spirit.

     To dust they'll return the little remaining.

 

What can I say—with desire my enemy,

     from boyhood till now pursuing me:

What is Time to me but your Will?

     If you're not with me, what will I be?

I stand bereft of any virtue:

     only your justice and mercy shield me.

 

But why should I speak, or even aspire?

     Lord, before you is all my desire.

"
"

Lord of wondrous workings,grant us understanding—      now at the hour of closing.

 

A chosen few are called,

     their eyes toward you lifting—

they stand exalted in their trembling      now, at the hour of closing.

 

They pour forth their souls;

     erase, then, their straying—

and grant them, Lord, your absolution      now at the hour of closing.

 

Be a shelter for them

     through all their suffering;

consign them only to rejoicing      now, at the hour of closing.

 

Show them your compassion,

     in your justice turning

on all who brought oppression to them—      now at the hour of closing.

 

Recall their fathers’ merit

     and count it as merit for them;

renew their days as once they were,      now, at the hour of closing.

 

Call for the year of grace—

     the remnant flock’s returning

to Oholìbah and Oholàh—      now at the hour of closing.

 

"
"

For all

the pain

 

passed down

the genes

 

or latent

in the very grain

 

of being;

for the lordless

 

mornings,

the smear

 

of spirit

words intuit

 

and inter;

for all

 

the nightfall

neverness

 

inking

into me

even now,

my prayer

 

is that a mind

blurred

 

by anxiety

or despair

 

might find

here

 

a trace

of peace.

 

"
"

the target is a record of the past history of the target

or forever hold your or told you so complacent

mention repeats numerous trills in memory

sugar and spice in the bag suppressed

supposedly on an axis allow for the idea to rest

"
"

a bullet has passed through

spent the time elsewhere

to need, tenderly, potential

does not need to be bought, cannot

in fact refute the cause, rather catches

"
"

I’m waiting for a poem,

something rough, not elaborate or out of control,

something undisturbed by curses, a white raven

released from darkness.

 

Words that come naturally, without aiming at anything,

a bullet without a target,

warning shots to the sky

in newly occupied lands.

 

A poem that will well up in my chest

 

and until it arrives

I will listen to my children fighting in the next room

and cast my gaze down at the table

at an empty glass of milk

with a trace of white along its rim

my throat wrapped in silver

a napkin in a napkin ring

waiting for late guests to arrive. . . .

 

"
"

Prisoners

guilty or not

always look the same when they are released—

patriarchs dethroned.

 

This one just passed through the gate

head bowed despite not being tall

his gestures like a Bedouin’s

entering the tent

he carried on his back all day long.

 

Cotton curtains, stone walls, the smell of burnt lime

take him back to the moment

the cold war ended.

 

The other day his sheet was hung up in the courtyard

as if to flaunt the blood stain

after a wedding night.

 

Faces tarnished by sun

surround him, all eyes and ears:

“What did you dream of last night?”

A prisoner’s dreams

are parchment

made sacred by its missing passages.

 

His sister is still discovering his odd habits:

the bits of bread hidden in pockets and under his bed

the relentless chopping of wood for winter.

 

Why this fear?

What can be worse than life in prison?

 

Having choices

but being unable to choose.

"
"

We lived in the long intolerable called God.

We seemed happy.

 

I don’t mean content I mean heroin happy,

donkey dentures,

 

I mean drycleaned deacons expunging suffering

from Calcutta with the cut of their jaws

 

I mean the always alto and surely anusless angels

divvying up the deviled eggs and jello salad in the after-rapture

 

I mean

to be mean.

 

Dear Lord forgive the love I have

for you and your fervent servants.

 

I have so long sojourned Lord

among the mild ironies and tolerable gods

 

that what comes first to mind

when I’m of a mind to witness

 

is muriatic acid

eating through the veins

 

of one whose pains were so great

she wanted only out, Lord, out.

 

She too worshipped you.

She too popped her little pill of soul.

 

Lord if I implore you please just please leave me alone

is that a prayer that’s every instance answered?

 

I remember one Wednesday witness told of a time

his smack-freaked friends lashed him

 

to the back of a Brahman bull that bucked and shook

until like great bleeding wings the man’s collarbones

 

exploded out of his skin.

Long pause.

 

“It was then,” the man said, “right then…”

Yes. And how long before that man-

 

turned-deacon-turned-scourge-of-sin

began his ruinous and (one would guess) Holy Spirit-less affair?

 

At what point did this poem abandon

even the pretense of prayer?

 

Imagine a man alive in the long intolerable time

made of nothing but rut and rot,

 

a wormward gaze

even to his days’ sudden heavens.

 

There is the suffering existence answers:

it carves from cheeks and choices the faces

 

we in fact are;

and there is the suffering of primal silence,

 

which seeps and drifts like a long fog

that when it lifts

 

leaves nothing

but the same poor sod.

 

Dear God—

 

"
"

Somehow, I am still here, long after

transistor radios, the eight-tracks my father blared

 

driving from town to town across Ohio

selling things, the music where we danced

 

just to keep alive. I now understand I was not

supposed to leave so soon, half a century

 

a kind of boulder that I’ve pushed up the hill

& now for a moment, like Sisyphus

 

I watch it roll.

I walk through the snow.

 

I breathe the dirty East Side wind

pushing past the Russian church, the scent

 

of fish & freighters & the refinery

filling the hole in my chest—how many years

 

have piled since I last stumbled out onto the ice

& sat down to die.

 

Only to look up at the geometry

of sky—& stood

 

to face whoever might need me—

"
"

When is a poem one word? Even at 17 he was Baraka

           on the court, Coltrane gold toned, a kind of running riff,

more than boy-child, man-child, he was one word like Prince.

            How back in those drunken days when I still

ran in bars & played schoolyard ball

            & wagered fives & tens, me & my colleague

the psych-prof drove across Eastern Ohio

             just to see this kid from powerhouse St. Vincent,

grown out of rust-belt-bent-rims, tripped

            with the hype & hope & hip hop

blaring from his headphones, all rubber soled

            & grit as the city which birthed him.

We watched him rise that night scoring over 35,

            drove back across the quiet cut cornfields

& small towns of Ohio, back to the places

            where we slept knowing that Jesus had been reborn, black

& beautiful with a sweatband crown rimming his brow.

            He was so much more than flipping burgers & fries,

more than 12-hour shifts at the steel plant in Cleveland.

            More than the shut-down mill in Youngstown.

More than that kid selling meth in Ashtabula.

            He was every kid, every street, every silo, he was white

& black & brown & migrant kids working farms.

            He was the prince of stutter-step & pause. He was the new

King. We knew he was coming back the day after he left

            his house in Bath Township. He never sold it.

Someone fed his fish for years. Perhaps our hope? Fuck Miami.

Leave Wade to wade through the Hurricane rain. LeBron is

remembering that woman washing the linoleum floor, that man

          punching his punch card. He drives a Camaro, the cool kid

Ohio car driving through any Main Street. He is the toll-taker, &

            he is the ticket out.

He keeps index cards documenting

            his opponents’ moves. One leans forward before he drives.

One always swipes with his left hand. The details like a preacher

            studying the gospel. He studies the game like a

mathematician conjugating equations, but when he moves he is a

            choreography,

a conductor passing the ball like a baton. He is a burst of cinders

            at the mill. He is a chorus of children calling his name.

            The blistered hands of man stacking boxes

in Sandusky, the long wait for work in Lorain.

A sapling bends

            & reaches in all directions

before it becomes a tree. A ball is a key to a lock.

            A ball is the opposite of Glock.

America who sings your praises,

           while tying the rope, everyone waiting for Caesar to fall,

back-stabbing media hype city betrayed

            by white people with racist signs.

            I watch the kids play ball

in the Heights, witness this they say. We will rise. I watched

            LeBron arrive & leave, I walked, I gave up drinking

as he went off & won a ring. The children’s chorus calls out sing

            brother, sing. Everything is black. Storm clouds gather

out on Lake Erie. But the old flower-hatted women

            at the Baptist church are heading out praise cards,

registering teenagers to vote. To turn a few words into a sentence.

He is a glossary of jam, & yes he is corporate

            chugging down green bubbly Sprite, running in Beats head

phones, he is Dunkin his donut, he is Nike, witness, ripped.

            On a spring day in Akron a

            chorus of children is chanting his name on the court by the

chain-link fence. He is forged steel, turning his skinny body into

            muscle, years of nights lifting, chiseling, cutting, studying.

Watching the tape. To make a new kind of sentence. He is passing

            out T-shirts, this long hot bloody summer he was returned

to the rusted rim along the big lake. He is stutter-step. He is

            spinning wheel. He has a cool new hat. He is speaking of dead

black children. He is giving his time. To make the crowd

            sway like wind through a field of corn.

            Does LeBron think of dying?

            Does the grape think of dying as it withers on the vine by

the lake? Or does it dream of the wine it will become?

He is wearing a shirt that says I Can’t Breathe.

They said he was arrogant. I said he was just Ohio.

            He married his high school sweetheart. Bravado laid out

on the court. No back down, he is Biggie with a basketball inside

            of a mic, no ballistics, just ballet. He is Miles Davis cool,

quietly cerebral, turning his back, tossing up

            chalk like blue smoke, blue notes, blues. He is Akron,

Columbus, he is heart & Heat turned to lake effect blizzards,

            freighters frozen in ice, looking for work & no money to eat.

He is Ashtabula & Toledo. He is carrying so many across the

            river, up through Marietta.

            The grapevines are ripe in Geneva.

            He returns, Man-child, Man-strong, Man-smart, Man-

mountain, Mansfield to East Akron, minus into Man, or should we

            say Mamma raised? Single mother fed, shy child, quiet child

who grew, who suffered & taught his body to sing, his

            mother worked how many shifts, doing this, doing that,

never gave up for her son. He is third shift at the rubber

            plant in winter, he is farm hands & auto parts piecework

& long nights the men at the bar, eyes on the television.

            The lake tonight is black as newly laid asphalt.

There are no ellipses. He is turning paragraphs

            into chapters. Long ago the hoop Gods made this deal

at the crossroads, Old Scratch is flipping the pages

            of his program & waiting high in the stands—to belong to a

place most people would call

            nowhere, to show the world how tough we truly are,

twelve-hour shifts at the Rubber plant in Akron. How he is, how

            he is a part of this asphalt court we call Ohio, & how we

suffer, & how we shine.

"
"

In the next room, Peter’s gloved hands crack

cordoned-off spines: he has been granted

permission, his agent’s call his pedigree.

So the tour itself is only the docent and me.

He is docile, eager to please, leads me

up the stairs and takes me to the bed.The coverlet is authentic, he says.

He lectures me on the heating system, offers

an anecdote of a broken casserole, recites

all of the Welty lore he has rehearsed.

She taught him when he was young, and now

he serves her legend, lets me lean in

toward the books—I cross the line

of what’s allowed, never touching.

He shows me photos—two loves lost, one

a married man—then on the way down,

pauses before a feather in a box,

reciting Yeats’s “Leda and the Swan.”

He begins to weep at Let her drop, adds,Like Welty’s loves! Now I stop—

is he comparing her to the god, or Leda?

He cannot bear her, her Unfulfilled Love.

I cannot bear this either—how dare he conjure up

for her such disappointment, such wasted longing?

I want to be the mirror of her photographs,

to be her figure of my own conjuring. I want

to believe I, too, could be happy here, in this

solitary house, in this small town, amidst

the rows and stacks of books. Untouched.

"
"

When you walked in

it was like recognizing

 

the moon when he returns.

His lover bites his cheek; she

 

has no choice. All we see

is the dissolution, then await

 

the reconstruction.

Each time, the sky

 

yanks her into his orbit.

I want to say I’m sorry.

 

I want to sayYou win. Our bodies are like

 

the confessional booth these

poems are stuck in. Even

 

the priest can see that sin.

You’ll be all spit and honey—

 

or maybe I’m the poisoned

flower gnawing on its own

 

lip because it has no hands

to reach for you. Only words

 

that are as useless as the pollen

for saying anything. I continue

 

to serve them even with your hands

around my throat from across

 

the room. Your voice is home,

I answer it like a bat guided

 

across the atmosphere. This

is a narrative that cannot end

 

well but wants to, but must.

I’ll continue to go down kicking

 

and you’ll be sweet as anything

until you bite back. No, it can’t

 

end here—we won’t let it.

Billions of years have passed

 

since an asteroid last hit

the moon: clearly some

 

magnetic fields can be sustained.

"
"

When you asked if it rained bees or poison

you were asking the wrong question. Again.

 

You still didn’t understand the difference

between hurricanes and flooding. Thus between

 

gods and humans. Between your slum-

lordy digs and the shacks I pass that cling

 

to old boards and huddle around each family.

The yards marking the care of home.

 

Everywhere something is falling on

someone and I watch like an autumn

 

tourist tripping through the Berkshires.

I reach to catch a leaf. I try to straighten

 

a Pisa-like sapling. The wind wraps around

us both like a question mark and leaves

 

me standing, the sole witness on this end.

I’m telling you about a place of silence.

 

You want it all to be a metaphor. I’m watching

a front porch crumble. Still, someone sits there.

"
"

I.

Serious smiles a lot.

At least that’s what they say,

His Mum and Pop

Trying to be proud

As all the nurses gather round

To squint into the cloud

Of little Serious on the ultrasound.It’s likely just the way he’s bent,

The head nurse finally thunders

Into the awe and argument

Swirling through the crowd

Where someone mutters half-aloudIn all my years…

 

Serious never hears.

Serious spins and spins

With his dumb dolphin grin

In the best bed there is,

Where there’s no guilt and no sin,

No child more inner than this;

Nothing to will

And nothing to want,

No body you both are and haunt;

No drug of disappointment

Or feeling that there’s never now

(Or do these seep in somehow?);

No suffering the world’s idiocy

 

Like a saint its pains;

No traffic and no planes;

No debts, no taxes,

No phones and no faxes;

No rockslide of information

Called the Internet.

 

Serious isn’t. Yet.

 

 

2.

Serious hears a sound.

Not unusual, in itself, nothing to be concerned about.

Here and there there’s been a shout,

A song he seemed to be inside,

The weird whale-calls of her gas.

This, too, shall pass.

 

Then it comes again,

And with a far-off force

Which a shrink less serious than he

Will have him dream is a drain

That all his impurity

Is slowly drifting toward(Down, Serious says, down!) 

Beyond which he’ll be clean,

Feel no pain…

 

Then the dark erupts in a rain

Of blood and muck

He seems to mostly be,

Holding on for all he’s worth,

Which isn’t much, finally,

Little wizened thing

Plopping out to an earth

Where cries of agony

Dwindle to equivocal joy(It’s, it’s…is it a boy?) 

And some clear world lies

Just beyond the eyes

You can’t quite open;

 

And everything is wet,

And loud, and broken;

And all of life is one huge tit

You’re meant to somehow suck.

 

Serious staggers to his feet,

Slaps himself harder than the doctor did

And says, I’m fucked.

 

 

3.

Serious is learning silence

In the way most children learn to speak.Poshlust!

He gasps after his first feeding,Götterdämmerung in his first dusk,

His whole body writhing with a kind of violence

As if the world had wounded him,

Words his bleeding.

 Anomie, Deus absconditus

Drift into the air above his crib;Accursed progenitor, quintessence of dust

Dribble with the pap onto his bib;

As day by day, and week by week,

Serious wrestles with this difficult gift,

Forgetting, which, it seems, he is on this earth to do.

 Boob, ass, oaf,

Riving out of him like greatness going off;Ninny, crackpate, clunkhead, gorm,

Leaving him gasping and bent;fragments, sheep, rabble,

All falling, falling from him

Backwards into babble...

 

Finally Serious lies there, spent,

Language like some immense ghostly mobile

Bobbing just above his bed,

All power of movement gone as well:

 

Useless little buglike arms, buglike little fingers,

This heavy, heavy head.

 

And now if there’s something Serious can’t quite taste,

Or if he feels too acutely his own waste,

Or knows too acutely what he can’t tell,

He screams and screams

Until the world knows what Serious means.

 

 

4.

Serious goes to school.Just try it, his Mum says

As she lets go his hand

And wipes a last glaze

Of doughnut from his nose,

And Serious, insofar as Serious can,

Does give it a good try,

Though it’s hard to understand

Why they keep taking a break

From taking breaks, or why

They can’t simply walk

In line down the hall,

Or what, finally, is at stake

In a game of kickball.

 

It’s time to draw a tree.

What a relief to work alone,

Serious thinks, as he picks a scab

For just the right tinge of sky,

Breaks his sugar cookie

To make a place of stone,

And fashions out of bread

A man with a huge head

And huge, ruined wings,

Gasping at all the ruined things

To which he’s tumbled.

And calls it: Cookie, Crumbled.

 Oh my, the teacher says

When she walks by,Those are interesting trees. 

Serious closes his eyes and sees

As in a vision of doom

Himself drowning in schools,

A whole ocean of fools

Nipping, nipping at him

With their tiny, tiny teeth.

And Serious sighs

With a prophet’s wisdom

As he climbs up into his seat,

Stares out across the room

And like a prophet cries:You’re all going to die!

 

The class is a tomb.

Serious, rigid, waits.

A girl in pigtails giggles,

Then another near the back.

And as if along a fuse

The giggling goes

Up and down the rows

Till someone makes a crack

About his coat and tie

And the laughter detonates.

 

Serious climbs slowly down

Into that inferno of sound

Which the teacher’s shouts

Are only driving higher,

Packs up his lunchbox, his dignity,

And his copy of Sartre,

 

And strides with a prophet’s gaze

Through all that derisive fire.

Only once does he turn,

Briefly, to look back through the blaze

At the iron fact of his art,

Smaller from here, but unburned.

 

 

5.

Serious loves his Mum.

And then he doesn’t, quite.

It’s that way with everything—

Baths and plums,

The blessèd silence of night.

 Would you like to help with this?

His mother asks

As she rolls out biscuit dough

And cuts it with a glass

Or folds the clothes

Still warm from the sun.

But Serious knows

He was born with a task,

And though he touches the clothes

And tastes the dough,

Serious says, No.

 

Serious stays in the bath

Until his skin is shriveled and cold,

Eats himself sick on plums,

Feels in the dark

The dark he becomes,

And cries out in the night for his Mum.

 

 

6.

Serious is older now.

He just is.Thank God, Serious says,

For whom childhood, that stupid carousel that never stops,

Always had an element of disingenuousness:

The tristesse of lollipops,

The sham of naps;

Fools dandling you on their laps

So you can play horsey, which damn sure isn’t serious;

And all that endless business

Of pretending to be curious

About the most obvious things:

What’s night? Where’s Mama-Cat?

What’s wrong with Pop? Can God die?

Why, why, why?

 

To hell with that,

Serious thinks, as he sits incinerating memories

One by one,

Saying their names as he feeds them

Like photographs to a fire:

Here he is in a baseball uniform

Squinting back the sun;

Here in a blue tuxedo with a ruffled front;

And here, Lord, with pimples.

He pauses a moment.

Do memories have names?

And what, exactly, are these flames?

To hell with that!

Done.

 

Serious owns a car, pays taxes,

Contemplates a pension,

Has a crease of gray along his temples,

But he is young, young.

He develops headaches, begins sleeping badly, and relaxes,

You might say, into the constant tension

That he really always was,

With far, far too much to do

To look anywhere but onward,

Or to answer the questions of a child

With anything true.

 

 

7.

Serious isn’t Stupid,

Though they go to the same gym.

Serious sees him dropping weights

Or picking his butt and thinks,

At least I’m not him.

Nor is he Mean or Vain,

Those chiseled twins

With matching boots and belts,

Nor Smug who notes their sins,

Nor Shallow noting something else;

He isn’t useless Timid

Who no matter what won’t complain,

Nor fat-assed Nice sweating honey

On all the machines,

Nor Self-Loathing who smudges mirrors,

Nor Whacked who licks them clean.

Serious isn’t Funny.

 

Serious spreads his towel on the bench,

Sits down in front of his own image,

And Serious strains at a serious weight.

And never, not once, when he’s seen

In myriad mirrors around the room

That everyone else is straining too,

Has he caught himself too late

And finished with a roar

And more strength

Than he’s ever had before:I AM NOT YOU!

 

 

8.

Serious has a date with Doom.

It’s not the first, and seems unlikely to be the last,

For they get on quite well, Doom and he,

Share similar pasts

And similar ideas about what life should be.

It seems, in fact, that this might just bloom.

 

And what a relief.

After Morose and Mad and Neurotic;

After almost falling for Grief,

Who was so exotic

She made all the others seem tame.

Then to discover she even lied about her name.

And to sleep with another Serious! That was odd,

Like wrestling with an angel,

Though it was hard to tell from that rough unsated tangle

Which one was Serious, and which one God.

 

But how easy it is to be himself with Doom,

Serious thinks, as he puts the wine in to chill

And sets two glasses on a tray,

Who always wants whatever Serious wants

And always agrees with what he has to say;

Who doesn’t need to hear that whole spiel

About “going too fast” or “needing more room”;

And who doesn’t probe and pry that long needle into his brain

—What do you feel? What do you feel?—

Until it’s all Serious can do not to stand up and scream: Pain!

 

Lucky to be alive.

And if he still has no clear idea where she lives,

And never knows quite when she’ll arrive,

Still, something about Doom feels right

To Serious, and he looks forward to their dates.

He checks himself in the mirror, dims the light,

And waits.

 

 

9.

Serious is a traveler.

“Traveling broadens the mind,”

The man beside him says,

His tray table down and seat reclined

Even as they're taking off,

And Serious, who has his eyes closed

So he can do what Serious does,

Begins to cough.

 

               What do they say, what do they fear, 

               Is this song joy or grief? 

               This is a man, this is a god. 

               Who are you and why are you here? 

               To leave, to leave.

 

The meal is over,

Which Serious declined.

In the shell-roar of the cabin

He eases somewhat, is surprised to find

He could almost drift away.

“What line of work are you in?”

He hears the man beside him say,

And Serious begins coughing wildly again.

 

               What is that smell, what was that sound, 

               Isn’t that ice on the wings? 

               This is the air, there is the water, 

               But what do you do on the way down? 

               You scream, you scream.

 

How far they must have gone by now,

That old familiar world miles behind,

The man eats an orange,

And now he eats the rind.

He eats his plate, his plastic fork, chews

With animal relish his Styrofoam cup,

Leans over to eat bittersweet Serious too,

Who startles and wakes up.

 

               Look at the desert, look at the green, 

               Is there an end to that ice? 

               Here is a place, and here is a place, 

               But what is the space between? 

               It’s life, it’s life.

 

 

10.

Serious is married.

What a weird wind this is,

He thinks, so still at times,

Then stinging the eyes to tears.

And how he seems both more and less

Himself, and how it seems at once all of loneliness

And something he can hold.

Or is it he who's being carried?

He shivers, and reaches out for her again.

Or is it she who reaches, she who's cold?

What is this wind?

Where are these years?

 

 

11.

Serious experiences loss.

Just like that.

Flat.

Serious experiences loss,

 

As if he’d come to some sheer cliff

There was no way around,

No way to cross,

And found,

On the other side

Of a deep canyon, himself,

Experiencing loss.

 

Serious, when the man is gone,

Tells himself that he tried,

Tells himself that he cried and cried

For all he was worth

To the man sitting on the other side

Experiencing loss,

Who one day simply vanished, or moved on,

Or slipped off the edge of the earth

And died.

 

 

12.

Serious doesn’t speak French.

This embarrasses Serious,

Because insofar as he lives anywhere,

Serious lives in Paris.

 

He feels the city stare,

Feels himself sweat, and shake, as he tries to wrench

The little that he’s gleaned

Into the lot that he desires;

Feels shopkeepers look at him as if he were a liar,

Waiters as if he were unclean;

 

And feels, in truth, not at all serious,

As if he had a huge balloon for a head

And helium squeaks for a voice,

As if gravity could be merely a choice

He were making, and he might instead

Simply stop, let go, and drift away.

 

Finally Serious, opposed to epiphanies,

Has one he can’t resist.

He is Serious, and to be Serious

Is to know something utterly or not at all,

And to know, moreover,

That as you let your half-knowledge fall

From you, it does not exist.

 

Just like that Serious is himself again,

Saying weighty things

About the flowers in the stalls,

Pondering a splendid mirage

Called the Seine.

 

And if he wakes saying fromage,

Or in some shop feels

Right on the verge of translating please,

Serious knows it’s a dream,

And knows from childhood what to do.

Point and scream

Until the damn fools give you cheese.

 

 

13.

Serious has some culture.

He knows some things.

And if, as he begins to speak,

He should feel the immense wings

Of ignorance shadowing him, that dirty vulture

That squawks in drawl and drips tobacco juice,

Serious knows what shelter to seek.

 

Pick a name and Bach is better.

Modernism was powerful but diffuse.

Life’s drained out of pictures since the Renaissance.

Technique! Technique! Technique!

And about all that spastic flatulence

Called contemporary art,

Well, Serious hardly knows where to start.

 

Serious sits through opera without a yawn,

Chews up books on which weaker teeth would shatter;

He can tell you where one brushstroke lies,

List the reasons courtly love is gone,

Pluck the speck of subject matter

From Henry James.

Serious knows some things.

 

He thinks and thinks and thinks

Until his ignorance shrinks

To the tiniest of flies

Alighting somewhere in the Louvre.

Carefully, carefully, Serious creeps

With his massive swatter,

Saying, Don’t move. Don’t move.

 

 

14.

Serious believes in nothing.

It’s a nice day, what should we do?

What are you thinking?

What’s been bothering you?

What’s that you’re drinking?

 

Serious spreads the paper on his lap

To confirm what’s new under the sun,

Hears a tap, tap, tap 

Against the windowpane.

 Nothing ventured, nothing gained,

Floats up from childhood like a bit of ash,

And Serious, pausing, can almost see

His old preacher, that atom bomb of idiocy

Who every Sunday would explode.

Still, Serious thinks, there’s a truth to set you free.

But who could survive the blast?

 Tap, tap, tap.

 

Serious skims the sports pages,

Reads about a storm that rages

Far out at sea.

Some talking dog is taking office,

Some country wiping out monuments, expunging its past.

 Tap, tap, tap.

 Goddammit, Serious says, midway through a war,

And thinks again of that old bore

Who talked and talked and talked

Until you felt your head loll and sway

Like some huge flower on a tiny stalk

That one good breeze would break;

 

And how you’d see him afterwards eating chicken fried steak,

Chicken fried man,

With a tiny transistor radio in his hand

So he could listen to the football game;

And how his face seethed and writhed with what seemed pain

If he saw you coming to his booth,

And he stared off as if some great truth

Were finally, finally coming clear in that chicken fried brain

And like a prophet he was going to stand up and shout—

Until what plopped innocuously out

Was your own name.

 Tap, tap, tap.

 

Serious puts aside the news of the day

And walks to the only window there is.

But there’s no wind, not even the grass stirs.

And anyway, there’s no tree.

Serious shrugs and turns away.

Must just be me.

 

 

13.

Serious sees a child

In the playground across the street,

Sees his huge stupid head and huge stupid feet

As he tries to keep up with the games,

And hears his sonar screams

Of delight amid the other children's screams,

And hears his timid weeping when they call him names.

 

Serious sees the child standing apart sometimes

Driveling to himself in silly rhymes,

And sees him pretend to look intently at the sky

If Serious walks by,

Or sees him simply stop and stare.

 

Gradually Serious starts seeing the child everywhere,

In a store standing in an aisle,

In the subway while

Serious is trying to work on the way home,

Or laughing with his family in a restaurant

Where Serious eats alone.

 

Serious knows the truth.

This child wants something, his whole nature is want.

And it begins to be annoying,

This novice cringing, all the imbecilic and cloying

Tactics of being cute,

The whole hangdog way he has of panhandling pity

With his freckles and his missing tooth,

Sitting all fidgety in his Sunday suit

Or babbling happily as he’s leaking snot;

 

And then the air he suddenly puts on of being serious

When it’s so obvious he’s not.

 

Serious sees the child in the playground

Standing to the side,

Sees his face whiten and his eyes go wide

As Serious crosses the street and strides

Until his shadow swallows the child

And leans down close enough for them to kiss.I don’t have time for this,

Serious says,I’ve got too much to do.

 

And the child says, Who are you?

 

 

16.

Serious kills himself.No, no,

Shivering out of a dream,

Starlight and the hard glitter

Under the bridge’s beam,

Serious, Serious,

Don’t go.

 

Serious crawls out of bed,

Feels the cold in the floor

And thinks, suddenly, of lovely Mad

(Where can she be?)

Who’d bolt out of sleep and screamFarmers get up at four!

It’s three.

 

Serious makes himself a cup of coffee,

Which he doesn’t drink;

Tries and fails to read,

Tries and fails to think.

Serious sits, and holds himself still,

Minute by minute;

Until the dawn finally comes

And he is in it.

 

 

17.

Serious lives alone.

It’s better this way, he tells himself,

As he takes a pan from the pan shelf,

A spatula from the spatula drawer,

And fries two eggs the way he likes them:

Yolks of stone.

 

No more gnats of chatter over breakfast.

No more breakfast. It’s noon.

No one prancing by with only panties on

When he’s almost, almost broken through,

Or singsonging outside his doorSerious, O Serious, where are you?

No more!

 

But what, finally, does Serious do?

He sits, ignores the ringing phone,

Looks at a wall

On one of the last warm days of the year,

And settles back into the lifelong call

Of being serious,

Which is to see, within that whiteness,

Leaves being gently blown,

And to feel their colors as they fall.

 

 

18.

Serious gives a speech.

He sets his papers on the podium,

His glass within easy reach,Tap, tap, taps the microphone.

How vast this venue is.

How absolute this darkness.

 To be serious is to be alone!

Serious cries out with a triumphant look on his face,

Waiting for the echoes to end

Out there in all that space,

Which the words at once define and extend.

It takes a while, but they do die.

The spotlight lasers in.

He blinks hard, starts again.

 To know in every hand another’s touch, To hear a silence words only intensify, To feel not too little but too much This attenuated world—

 

Serious begins to sweat,

Feels the back of his shirt grow wet;

Looks down to see his papers swirled

And scattered, the glass on the floor, broken.

What’s with this fucking light, he thinks,

Or was it spoken?

He glares out at the dark, impassive crowd

And as if by force he could make them wake

Hears his voice growing loud:

 Whatever you most treasure you will break, Whatever you hold closest you will let go, There is no place that you will not leave! But to be serious—

                                  Serious says,

Quietly now, because he has them, they are his—

 To be serious, to be truly serious, is to know That what you call your losses you cannot grieve, For it was never quite these things that you wanted—This treasure, this touch, this one place—But by such life to be haunted.

 

Brilliant!

No notes, no flaws.

Serious stands back and waits for applause.

The hall is silent, utterly silent,

The heat tropic.

 

Serious looks around, confused,

Turns to the man who introduced him

Then can’t remember being introduced;

And even given his credentials,

This suddenly seems a most unlikely topic.

 

Serious tries to get out of the light,

But the light goes where Serious goes.

He blunders to the edge of the stage,

A cliff

Breaking off into a dark

in which there's no movement, no voices, not one sigh.

 

Serious feels the rage

Draining out of him, and feels a chill, and whispers,Where am I?

 

 

19.

Serious nears an end.

It’s cold and getting colder,

And Serious, older,

Sits outside thinking of his good friend,

Who like so much of Serious is gone,

And thinking of that godforsaken dawn

After the one night of his life he spent outdoors.

 Tell me,

His good friend said

When Serious staggered out to the fire,Which form would you say is higher,Tragedy or comedy?

 

And Serious, who had stumbled full-bladdered

In the night from a dream of bears,

Then dreamed himself the object

Of a dozen hungry stares,

Who had swiveled, pissed into the tent,

And sworn such things it would take a life to repent,

Serious, exhausted Serious,

Was silent.

 Because it’s been troubling me,Serious, that the answer can only be tragedy.To be conscious is to be conscious ofLosing whatever it is that you most love,And thus an art that's truly greatWill always have one deepest truth to tell,Which is, my friend, this life is hell.

 

Serious looks at the sky. It’s late.

A small wind blows

The trees, and Serious, shivering, knows

He should head inside,

That he is not well.

But sitting here, letting his eyes close,

Serious can almost see that lake

Aflame with the early sun, and smell

The sweet burn of that wood,

And feel the way it seemed his heart would surely break

Were it not for the strange lightness in his head

As his friend smiled and said,But maybe earth is the heaven of the good.

 

 

20.

Serious talks to God.

There’s no one else left.

His mind is mash,

His world is ash,

And Serious occasionally forgets himself,

Though he is not, not Bereft,

That sniveling idiot two doors down

Who sits up late

With only ashes in the grate

And talks to God.

 See? Serious says. See?Nothing.

Serious spreads his arms magnanimously

As if to give God the floor.

God declines.Thou know’st the first time that we smell the airWe wawl and cry,

Serious says, louder than before.And then we wawl and cry some more,And then we die,And then we rot!

Again he waits in case

There’s disagreement. There’s not.

 

Serious scoffs, goes to brush his teeth,

Forgets briefly to avert his eye

From the mirror’s glare

And finds his father there,

 

That gentle baffled man

Who, when there was no hope,

When he couldn’t even stand,

Carved from a piece of soap

A silly yellow duck

And set it in a little yellow dish.

Serious feels a tingling in his hair

And mutters something close to a prayer,I wish, I wish...

 

The lights go out.Goddammit, Serious shouts

As he trips and falls

To his knees on the floor,

Banging his head on the door

As he tries to rise.GodDAMMIT! Serious cries.

 

The lights come on.

His father’s gone,

But there, at the edge of the sink,

Balances the little duck in the little dish

No serious person would ever keep.

Serious tries to think,

Steadies himself as if at some brink,

Decides he needs sleep,

That’s what he needs,

Crawling fully clothed into his bed

And pulling the covers to his chin

Because, it seems, there’s some strange wind

 

That’s somehow gotten inside.

So unlike Serious,

To leave a door unclosed.

 

Yet here it is, gathering strength

As it blows his books

On the floor and it blows

Right through his body and it blows

Behind and below and above

And out of the whirlwind a voice cries

 

                    Love

 What? Serious says, as he tries

To sit upright and looks

Wildly around him,

Raising his fist in the air.The things...I have lost—

 

Immediately he is tossed

Back against the wall

By the force of a storm

That has no source, no form,

And hears again the call

Out of nowhere:

 

                    Love

 My God! Serious screams,

Unable to help himself,What maundering politician,What decerebrated pop star, What stupid puling poet Couldn’t tell me that? 

Struggling to get out of bed

He starts to cough, then choke,

A riot in his heart,

A riot in his head

As he falls off the edge to the floor.Who do you think you are, 

He gasps. Is this... Is this some sort of JOKE?

 

Suddenly the strange wind is quiet,

But no less strange the calm that comes after.

 I’m serious, the voice says.

 

And Serious dies of laughter.

 

 

EPILOGUE

The dead man’s famous.

No one now remembers him alive,

Or knows his name, or anything he did.

Still, a few stories survive

After all this while

Of a weird-looking man

With a weird-looking smile

That had, it’s said,

Almost a kind of life to it,

Though the man was seriously dead.

 

And some remember how all the flies

Vanished for miles;

And some say no, no, but the buzzards had weird smiles

As if they knew something.

And some tell of an old woman

Who would come and whisper in the dead man’s ear,

And smooth the dead man’s hair,

And if the door opened, disappear.

There are even stories of that grim mortician

Who thought the smile undignified

And tugged and tugged so hard

He slipped and fell inside

Right on top of the dead man,

Whose lips, he swore, seemed to soften,

Seemed to somehow kiss.

And some remember this:

Before the lid was sealed on that coffin

And the nails driven,

There were on that face real tears.

And some say he smiled like a man forgiven.

 

The dead man never hears.

The dead man spins and spins

With his dumb dolphin grin

Through all the places where he is

When people talk of him again:

In classrooms or in planes,

In boredom or in pain;

In front of screens

Or in the spotlight’s glare;

In days too mild to bear

And in the long nights where

The dark grows steep,

The wind wild,

And a mother rises from her sleep

To calm her serious child.

 

"
"

It is not pain that holds me back, but time

With its sad prefigurations and smell,­­­

Its flowers and echoes, rivers and crime.

Even now, without a future, I tell

Myself lies in future tense. As my hair

Thins, I collect combs. When clocks chime, I groan.

The falling world finds pleasure in despair

Because to suffer means to be alone,

And I suffer through all the accidents

Of change as though I were settling a score,

As if to disinvent what death invents.

I once built a castle, now I do chores.

To pass the time I rearrange my things.

To fall asleep I recite names of kings.

 

"
"

Love of air and water

Joined in apprehension,

Perhaps you know what's there

By way of fear, for while

 

Living in pursuit of

And going always forth

Toward something that trembles.

Its knowledge is your mind.

 

What do you think about

The great ocean's sullen

Aristocrats—these small

Headaches and dark affairs

 

That bathe themselves in your

Staging grounds, where you go

To contemplate how what

You want became your mind?

 

The black oblivion

Offers no reprieve for

You, hunter—in its keep

Your ears have grown too sharp,

 

So sharp you almost hear

Your own heartbeat over

The subtle whispers of

Water’s dismal gardens.

 

Everything about you

Is overblown, even

Your mouth is uniquely

Talented at its tasks,

 

Gathering for slaughter

Animals in their sleep,

Speaking without a sound.

Noah had seven laws,

 

You have only one—eat

To build life out of death,

Survive above all things.

The fatalistic moon

 

Filtered down upon you

Seems an imitation

Of lives you will not live.

Would you be its hero?

 

Would you call out against

The morning’s weaving light

That shames the night before

The passing of its cool?

 

Would you be at the beach

When the invisible

Becomes a glow, to surprise?

Inland, workers dreaming

 

Of unitarian

Proposals lose no sleep

To fear about your mouth.

It is their wayward friends,

 

Who wandered too far west

Into fevered chaos,

That wake up with your name

As screams exploding dreams.

 

The inland ether holds

Clouds in your dismal shape.

Lucky are those who know

Nothing, who cannot see

 

Hell outlined in vapor.

Somewhere a piano

Plays a sorrowful song

Half-written by the hate

 

That a grieving loved one

Would stick into your heart.

Such are the arts of men.

Beware. Your time is near.

 

Someone has learned lessons

You didn’t mean to teach.

A crowd is gathering.

Your skull is their kingdom.

"
"

You hold onto life like a hostage. You're deeply embedded.

You're an actor slipping into a new script. You're a comma

Whose purpose is to mark the moment when prose is suspended,

Where begins a poem's pensive silence or some dark drama.

 

You're a Charles Dickens character in the opium den

Of a long life. All you want is to sleep through the nights after

Satisfying intercourse, but your mimesis may have been

Caught by sexually transmitted diseases. Disaster

 

Is an evening when you're so hungry every apple core

Evokes grocery stores. Being the only one and only,

They can't clone or disown you. The only thing you lack is your

Adult teeth, beneath the rotten teeth of what makes you lonely.

 

And the truth is that devolution concurs with disposal

Till it emerges, when entourage lobbies for Decalogue,

And hype is the new preparation before its proposal,

Calling for the removal of all shoes, shirts, and demagogues,

 

And the zealous anti-Orientalists who refuse to

Use anyone's last names first when denying them service at

The sperm bank, where the preferred euphemism is ""super glue.""

Remember the joke about the butcher who couldn't get fat?

 

Rejuvenated vaginas and enhanced penises squeak

Thanks to Puritanism gone gaga vis-à-vis bling-bling

À la bada bing. People piled up form a sexual peak.

Two condoms put up their dukes inside a contraceptive ring.

 

Champagne is the new organizer for your political

Campaign to conceive something tantamount to FASD

Of the spirit. Were you surprised or did you wax critical

When you emerged from the driveway to your domesticity

 

Without any disease but your family's questionable

Cultural history? Is it such a mystery that your

Mediocrity's latently poised to emerge? That you're full

Of traditional vulnerability? You'll pace the floor

 

Until you face (at a number of paces proportional

To the gravity of the insults that have been thrown your way)

Yourself dressed like a clown. Your brain will halt to urbanely sprawl

And then catapult your past beyond your future like a clay

 

Pigeon across a clear blue sky, toward a lemonade stand

At which the theory of other minds attempts to explain

Why petroleum prices fluctuate with body count and

Meaningful relationships end in kaleidoscopic pain.

"
"

I believe that witness is a magnitude of vulnerability.

That when I say love what I mean is not a feeling

nor promise of a feeling. I believe in attention.

My love for you is a monolith of try.

 

The woman I love pays an inordinate amount

of attention to large and small objects. She is not

described by anything. Because I could not mean anything else,

she knows exactly what I mean.

 

Once upon a time a line saw itself

clear to its end. I have seen the shape

of happiness. (y=mx+b)

I am holding it. It is your hand.

"
"

You said I will pull you out of my body in 237

ways. What you wanted was beautifully to

sever things. Here love: the same things. changed.

 

Finally: a taxonomy of afterthoughts. As though

you were the one who was

sleeping. Breathing in the marrow of would.

 

You, who are a valley of no, I hear the music leaking. (How she.

How she. How I.) You say low key and I do not believe you.

I forgive everything: the perseveration of skin.

 

My hands that are a chopping block and I

cannot touch him. I cannot touch him

without not touching me.

 

Because if you leave, and you are already leaving, there are three.

But you say less than three. And the couch, in your absence,

is crenellated. And who is going to watch us as we leave.

 

To add to the list of changing things: life preservers are no longer

about preservation. They have become less holy. P F D =

personal flotation device. Endlessly possible. Unlike wood.

 

Stacey May Fowles wants a lover who will hit her.

(I do not believe in submission.) I want you to erase me.

This is a kindness. A kindness you tell me. A kindness I do not deserve.

 

On the floor. By the bed. Hotel Congress. March 19, 2005.

Room #23. We are a long way from disintegrated. You said Now. Look at me. And I did. And you bloomed.

 

(When my mother died, I will say.

Many years after my mother has died.

But I will not believe her. I'll be like my grandmother who

 

despite my parade of girlfriends and her profession

that nobody should be mean to them, stilldoesn't believe in being queer.

 I don't believe in being dead,

I'll tell my dead mother. And just like you

she'll repeat herself. Happy New Year. Happy New Year. Happy New.)

 

I expect there will be a morning when you walk up to this very gate

while I am sitting here. I know this. I know you less each time I see you.

 I know this like I know you are more lonely than glass.

 

To your languishing. To your bubbly.

To your recent. To your hologram. To your desperately.

To your seeking. To your dictaphone. To your you.

 

Neuromuscular facilitation is just another way of saying

Vancouver. Always is yet a matter of roller derby. Just

in love with you. You, more than sleep.

 

In the top drawer is a photograph of them touching.

It is not so much that it is a photograph.

It is that it is a depiction of what. not could.

 

I want to tell you about my body. About testosterone

as unwitting art historian. About recovery. Me(n). What it feels like

underneath there. The part you cannot know. but should.

 

Either way. It's a house. It's a house

like everyone else has. I take things away.

I don't take them for good.

 

How delirious must we sound when we are falling.I miss you, you can't even imagine. And how bad

at math. Less than three. Less than three. Less than three.

 

And what if. I completely remember

it wrong. What if I remember there were two

of us. And then what if. there was only one death.

 

I do not believe in the existence of holes

that lead to nowhere. Muscle memory remains an enigma. Still, you can

touch her. You cannot touch her without not touching me.

 

(And still) you are not not a part of me. The world is

uncharacteristically unresponsive.

I could thank you. You stay with me. like grass.

 

"
"

Because the only view we have is the one

that looks down on the knees. Praise perspective.

Praise shared disdain. Praise space made by connective

tissue; the synaptic cleft; elbowroom

at the dinner table; polite conversation;

lies you push through your teeth. Because dissecting

a dog's heart won't change the way it thinks. Praise redirected

traffic. Praise the gnarled lip that defends

the gentle bones. Because your mother was

a seahorse. And to think of her thin is

to empty all the ice from the tea glasses;

to strain the soup by driving it through your hand.

Praise tablecloths; sway-back chairs; the plastic

folds that protect slice after slice of cheese.

"
"







For Alma Banda Goddard







my cynical feet ambled

prepared for indigestion

& blank faces of outrageous innocence

knowing I'd have to walk over years of media

declaring we're vanished or savage or pitiful or noble

My toes twitched when I saw so few brown faces

but really when one eats racism every time one goes out one’s door

the appeal of talking about it is minuscule

I sat with my back to the wall facing the door

after I changed the chairs to a circle

This doesn't really protect me

but I con myself into believing it does

One of the first speakers piped upI'm only here because my friend is Black & wantedme to do this with herI've already done300 too many racism workshops

Let it be entered into the Book of Stars

that I did not kill her or shoot a scathing reply from the hip

I let it pass because I could tell she was very interested in taking

up all the space with herself & would do it if I said a word

They all said something that I could turn into a poem

but I got tired & went to sleep behind my interested eyes

I've learned that the most important part of these tortures

is for them to speak about racism at all

Even showing up is heresy

because as we all know racism is some vague thing that really doesn't

exist or is only the skinheads on a bad day or isn't really a crucial problem

not as important certainly as queers being able to marry

or get insurance for each other

When they turned to me as resident expert on the subject

which quite honestly I can't for the life of me understand

or make any sense out of

I spoke from my feet

things I didn't know I knew

of our connections

of the deadly poison that racism is for all of us

Maybe some of them were touched

but my bitch voice jumps in to sayNOT MUCH!

I heard back that someone thought I was brilliant

Does that mean that I speak well

Or that she was changed

It's only her change

I need

"
"







For Kelly Morgan







ever do is die

Her brother was thrown out the window

by Black men he was drinking with

His cousin was stabbed near the store

She got shot

Nobody knows where he ended up

She hasn’t heard from her brother in 17 years

He killed himself when his wife left

Her son was hit by a car of drunk whites

Her uncle went off a cliff in the dark

Her grandmother died in the hospital

because they gave her the wrong medicine

Her baby was born addicted & died

My brother died as a baby

Her mother died of an overdose

She doesn’t know how her mother died

but no one has seen her for a long time

She was put in foster care because her parents died in a car wreck

I close my eyes & keep praying

sometimes there’s nothing to do

but brush back the tears

& keep on folding the laundry

"
"

I can smell the sweet scent of my own sweat

as I blow high with the breeze and swing,

I pump my legs like a child again my skinny kid’s butt

holds me down, keeps me grounded

when adults threaten to pull me off.

My chain breaks as I tempt to kiss the sun,

my knees have a life of their own bending

as if my very existence depended on it,

and it does, for I’d rather be a nut flying high

over people’s heads than on the ground dying

touching the earth, staining the water

with my unclean mind, my hands washing red

off the money so I can sleep off my power trip

and back stabbing toys.

I was an old soul at five spouting off

about the filth of my generation.

I knew greed was the root of all evil,

competition in close cousin.

I had my doubts about civilization as I found it

and convinced my sister Tricia to wear

flannel jammies zipped to the throat in the summer

to protect us from the babysitter’s bloodsucking

husband while our parents went out for supper.

 

July 2, 1998

"
"

White-Mexican looks like a Latina,

not my label

a question

from a Guatemalan student

who's come undone

in my ESL class,

doesn't get my kind

I try to describe

how I grew up

in Caucasian corn country

surrounded by houses

on cul-de-sacs

that all looked the same,

how we were alone

in a town of 5000,

one black family,

one Indian family,

one Asian family,

and one household of Mexicans,

no two, us and the Renterias

to whom we were related by marriage

before and after my divorce,

and they were mixed;

still, it was a good living,

happy in our cocooness,

our oneness,

separated by money

one direction

color on the other:

classes, classes, classes,

day and night

we took lessons:

piano, jazz, tap, ballet,

the dance team, trumpet,

trombone, tennis, Finishing School,

and one awful summer golf;

Christened, Confirmed, Cathechismized;

it all cut me in several places,

molding of head and heart

making me ultrasensitive,

then and now,

an observer of the outside,

an outsider among my own kind,

my very shade,

mysterious aloof

black haired beauty

who can't speak Spanish,

living among blue eyed dyed blond bombshells,

who held up her head higher

because she's shy not stuck-up,

understood, undenied, sacrificed to at any price

by my beloved little brown parents

who taught me well

gave up so much

so their daughters could shine

and they'd swell with pride

at the life they had given us,

on Sundays we basked

in mutual admiration after mass

singing our church songs while making breakfast,

according to the unspoken doctrine in our house of:

fast first eat later after communion,

we intruded with our Mexican music

bellowing out the open windows

the smell of bacon frying,

pancakes baking, coffee

and eggs scrambled to order

it wafted out on beautiful summer mornings

out of our house in Pleasant Hill, Iowa,

perched on the highest spot

one could reach on the East Side of the street

for first and second generation immigrants.

 

January 25, 2001

"
"

Flaunting in the atrium, ostentatious at the gates

I saw a shooting star thru a window on Alcatraz Ave

& cladding struck up against those who demand

We stomach the stick and tend the commode

They're selling trees in the paint store! trees in the paint store

Datebook chips in the soft skin of our wrists

On NBC, CNN, and NPR broken windows are weeping

We'll have 35 apples and shrieking in the thickets

Aloft in the air golden and golden the dial among the mounds

So much is stunted in understanding of what a light can be

They storm the scrimmage line and clear-cut bran and germ

We want the petal unto itself, the unalterable vessel

The arc end of the precipice grows 1.9% annually

What was popular music like before the crisis?

"
"

Habits accrue

in circular pattern

and living occasion

swollen among what

the dead have to teach us

 

So, ear, be an instrument for thought

Tide, bring some

little green thing to dust

behind my eyes

 

Touch the hotpoint

and drag the tongue

over the fat belly

of a flapping fish

 

Sticker book

of farm animals

Sticker book of ole timey cats

What is life and how shall it be governed?

 

With blind devotion

and endurance in the impossible

for guts in everything for roots

in plain sight

 

Share a lung

Accumulate none

Say hello to the crow

 

There are certain chord progressions

one should avoid

"
"

Sound of the rain so I know

there's constraint

sound of the train

so I know commerce

has not come to a standstill

now they raise the barrier

now they set it back in place

 

What coats the bottom

of the surface of the sound

when the swifts come in

when the clerks come home

who will bathe the children

who will bake the bread

 

when the luff is tight

when the mainsheet

starts the boat underway

 

whatever you do don't

let the tongue slip

from its moorings

 

what's that song?

love lift us up where we belong

 

I ate the pill

and the pill was real

 

"
"

After a winter of gluttony & grief

I'm back on plan for good this time.

I’ve ballooned to a specific kind of ugly

 

the kind you hope to hide

with body spray. But it gets worse

after a winter of gluttony & grief.

 

I’ve shown up for meatballs. For lemons

whipped to weeping. Now I land my balloon

for the specific kind of ugly

 

salad oil is. Happy date night, darling.

Happy coconut water + nutritional yeast.

After this winter of gluttony & grief

 

spring comes, stabbing her hard stem

of anger in the throat. Even garlic scapes

are flat balloons, their ugliness specific

 

as my penmanship: green tubes of spice

& hate. My body speaks the ugly testament

that took all winter. It says: Gluttony & grief balloon, darling. Only kindness is specific.

"
"

It's true: I have it

though I hardly approve

of anything it does.

 

Supposed bend of light

or smudge where two odd

angles cross. I hardly see—

 

can hardly do a thing

with it. White zone of

no flesh pressing

 

into no. So low, I can’t

scale or measure it. I used

to think: OK! A clean sharp place

 to keep. Or: I'll growa thing! to keep, for me! But

no. It's just a ward

 

to mark & mount, a loop

I lope around with, so

I count

 

myself a realm

of realms. I vote & vote.

Turns out, we agree

 

with everything we

do, almost. We sweep

the precincts

 

of ourselves: the rooms

between each rib

& under them

 

till we reach the fat

red condo where

our blood leans in.

 

We live here now. Half

heart, half townhouse.

Come on down.

 

Turn on that sweet TV.

Our mise en place, our rugs

& nooks: we’re full

 

of stuff. We paint

the furniture we couldn’t

live without. It’s true

 

at last: we have it all

though we hardly know

what any of it does.

"
"

I’ll conjure the perfect Easter

& we’ll plant mini spruces in the yard—

my pink gloves & your green gloves

 

like parrots from an opera over the earth—

We’ll chatter about our enemies’ spectacular deaths.

I’ll conjure the perfect Easter

 

dark pesto sauce sealed with lemon

long cords of fusilli to remind you of my hair

& my pink gloves. Your gloves are green

 

& transparent like the skin of Christ

when He returned, filmed over with moss roses—

I’ll conjure as perfect an Easter:

 

provolone cut from the whole ball

woody herbs burning our tongues—it’s a holiday

I conjure with my pink-and-green gloves

 

wrangling life from the dirt. It all turns out

as I’d hoped. The warlocks of winter are dead

& it’s Easter. I dig up body after body after body

with my pink gloves, my green gloves.

"
"

how can I tell you

baby, oh honey, you'll

never know the ride

the ride of a lowered chevy

slithering through the

blue dotted night along

Riverside Drive Española

 

poetry rides the wings

of a ’59 Impala

yes, it does

and it points

chrome antennae towards

 

’Burque stations rocking

oldies Van Morrison

brown eyed girls

Creedence and a

bad moon rising

over Chimayo

 

and I guess

it also rides

on muddy Subarus

tuned into new-age radio

on the frigid road

to Taos on weekend

ski trips

 

yes, baby

you and I are two

kinds of wheels

on the same road

 

listen, listen

to the lonesome humming

of the tracks we leave

behind

"
"

woodstove of my childhood

 

where potatoes cut like triangle chips were fried

in manteca de marrano

 

woodstove of lazy autumn smoke swirling away

to nowhere

 

woodstove of December

evacuating the cold chill at sunrise

 

woodstove of celebration and mourning

 

of post-World War II Korea y Vietnam

 

woodstove corner that kept vigil over

drunken nodding remembrance

 

woodstove corner where uncles primos compadres

gathered on visits from Califas

 

woodstove corner with a warm ear for nostalgia

 

where Mama Ane stirred the atole and wrung her hands

thumb over thumb praying for her children's children's children

 

woodstove that witnessed six decades washing its face at the vandeja

that saw western swing dancing in dim lantern flame

 

that watched Elvis come in from across the llano strumming

a mail-order Stella and singing in Spanish

 

woodstove

of the feast lamb tied up under the crabapple tree

 

of early sour cherries ripening above the cornstalk horizon

 

of neighbors bartering a cup of sugar

in exchange for mitote and conversation

 

woodstove of rain tenderly pouring into the afternoon

and salt sprinkling onto the patio from the mouth of the porch

 

woodstove of the nighttime crackling softly

 

of harmonious harmonica medleys

blowing before bedtime prayer

 

woodstove facing John F. Kennedy's

picture on the wall

 

woodstove of Protestant Sundays

ringing without bells

 

woodstove of dark earth

fat worms and acequias

 

woodstove of 1960s propaganda

and all the rich hippies knocking poorly at the screen door

 

woodstove of private crazy laughter

 

of woodpeckers pecking through rough-hewn

barn timbers only to meet the sky

 

of rabbits nervously nibbling evening away

in the arroyo

 

of the water bucket banging and splashing

all the way home

 

woodstove of the water drop sizzle

 

of buñuelos and biscochitos and flour on the chin

 

of chokecherry jam dropping out

from the end of a tortilla

 

woodstove

that heard Mentorcito's violin bringing in the new year

 

that saw Tío Eliseo bring in an armload of wood

 

that heard Tío Antonio coming down the road

whistling a corrido and swinging his cane

 

woodstove of the blessed noontime

and Grandma Juanita heating up the caldito

 

woodstove of the sanctified and untamed holy spirit

 

of the dream awake dreamers

prophesizing in the beginning how the end would come

 

of creaking trochil gates left open forever

 

of twisted caved-in gallineros rocking

in weeping April wind

 

of abandoned orchards waist deep

in desánimo

 

of teardrops that held back the laughter

 

of the penitente procession moving through the hills

for the soul of the village

 

woodstove of the wounded faithful proudly

concealing their scars

 

woodstove of armpit farts and bedtime giggles

 

of pitchforks and axes under the bed in case of intruders

 

of coffee cans filled with everything but coffee

 

of ten cents for a cream soda at Corrina's

 

of strawberry Nehis and a bag of chili chips at Medina's

 

of a handful of bubble gum acá Santos's

 

woodstove of genius wisdom dressed up as the village idiot

 

of hand-me-down stories locked away

in the dispensa

 

of bien loco local heroes cracking homeruns

Saturday afternoons en la cañada

 

woodstove

of all that and more of all that disappearing

 

as children played hide 'n' seek in that abandoned goodtime feeling

while stumbling on the footsteps of tradition

 

woodstove that heard the fall of a people rising in silence

 

that died of a loneliness without cure

that cured itself in the company

 

of the so many more lonely

 

woodstove of my childhood

"
"

I still see those men haphazardly standing

around the comps’ floor, mostly silent,

lost in their latest urgent jobs,

looking up and down as if nodding yes

 

from what they call their composers’ sticks

as they set inverse words and lines

of each page that could be taken for

Greek scripture, declaring:

 

In the beginning was the Word and the Word

was made cold type and the Word was

coldness, darkness, shiny greyness

and light—and the Word dwelt amongst us.

 

                                      *

 

Oh, I know these men would laugh this off.

They’d say, if they simply didn’t throw

their eyes to heaven, that they were just ordinary

characters trying to keep the devil from the door,

 

and with luck have enough left over each week

to back a few nags, and go for a few jars.

But they can’t say anything or set anything now.

They are scattered from that place that’s not

 

the same any more and many have left

any place we know of in this life,

calling to mind the old names for printing:The Mysterious Craft or simply The Mystery.

 

                                          *

 

I set them up in another city, another country

that’s as far away in distance

from that city as it’s far in time.

But they are still composing,

 

cracking the odd joke above

their sticks and galleys on some floor

of some building that is eternally busy

inside me even when I’ve forgotten

 

that I’ve forgotten them; forgetting

the world behind the word—

every time I read the word world I wonder

is it a typo and should I delete the l.

 

                                          *

 

Now again I hanker to know the quality

of each letter: the weight, the texture, the smell,

the shiny new type, the ink-dark shades of old,

the different types of type, the various sizes

 

within the same font, the measures in ems,

picas,  points and units. I’d set the words up,

making something out of all this

that stays standing—all set as masterly

 

as the words those men set that reveal

something of the mystery behind

and within these letters and the wonder and

the darkness, but with the lightest touch.

 

                                          *

And the umpteen ways things can foul up

are beyond telling. Maybe the type is off,

or the typesetter may not be up

to the work, if only out of a hangover

 

setting an ! where there should be a ?

or a b where there should be a d,

or miss aspace or a line or dingbat.

And the proofreaders don't catch the error,

 

passing the copy on as clean, or the make-up man

fouls the assembly page, or the stoneman errs

as he fastens the page of cold type and furniture

with the chase, turning the quoin’s key.

 

                                          *

 

Not to speak of the evil eye cast by

fellow composers ready

to knock the words of others, or the bosses

writing on the composition: Kill.

 

Old Shades, keep my words from such eyes

and fretting about that pied world and let me go

on regardless. And even if I foul up and the stewards

are right to set Kill on my last page and my words

 

are distributed and thrown in the hellbox,

the real achievement will be that I tried to set

the words right; that I did it with much labor

and not without a font of love. But that said,

 

                                          *

 

grant me the skill to free the leaden words

from the words I set, undo their awkwardness,

the weight of each letter of each word

so that the words disappear, fall away

 

or are forgotten and what remains is the metal

of feeling and thought behind

and beyond the cast of words

dissolving in their own ink wash.

 

Within this solution we find ourselves,

meeting only here, through The Mystery,

but relieved nonetheless to meet, if only

behind the characters of one fly-boy’s words.

"
"

I’m back again scrutinizing the Milky Way           

    of your ultrasound, scanning the dark                                                                 

        matter, the nothingness, that now the heads say           

   is chockablock with quarks and squarks,

gravitons and gravatini, photons and photinos. Our sprout,   

 

who art there inside the spacecraft                

    of your Ma, the time capsule of this printout,                

        hurling and whirling towards us, it’s all daft           

   on this earth. Our alien who art in the heavens,

our Martian, our little green man, we’re anxious     

 

to make contact, to ask divers questions           

     about the heavendom you hail from, to discuss                     

         the whole shebang of the beginning and end,           

    the pre-big bang untime before you forget the why

and lie of thy first place. And, our friend, 

 

to say Welcome, that we mean no harm, we’d die              

    for you even, that we pray you’re not here                     

       to subdue us, that we’d put away           

   our ray guns, missiles, attitude and share

our world with you, little big head, if only you stay.

"
"

When I was a troubadour

When I was an astronaut

When I was a pirate

You should have seen my closet

You would have loved my shoes.

Kindly consider my application

Even though your position is filled.

This is my stash of snow globes

This is my favorite whip

This is a picture of me with a macaw

This is a song I almost could sing.

When I was a freight train

When I was a satellite

When I was a campfire

You should have seen the starburst

You should have tasted my tomato.

I feel sorry for you I’m unqualified

This is my finest tube of toothpaste

This is when I rode like the raj on a yak

This is the gasoline this is the match.

When I was Hegel’s dialectic

When I was something Rothko forgot

When I was moonlight paving the street

You should have seen the roiling shore

You should have heard the swarm of bees.

"
"

Your first dog is ever your one dog

And no story has a happy ending anymore.

We have all wasted lives, sometimes we waste

Our own. Some nights are long ones, some

Never end at all. I don’t know how we canfall in love, which implies landing,

Whereas love promises everything but.

That’s why I like to listen to birds call

At dusk to each other from the acacias

But then I recall it’s still daylight and I

Hear them in the absence of the trees.

When I am traveling by train over mountains

All I think of is the sea. My father was

Never quite so alive until he died and now

He’s immortal. Somebody must do the calculus,

Somebody must work out the logic of the logic

Of this spectacle because spectacle’s the last

Word anyone would use for dreams that don’t cease,

For the sound of weeping coming from the next room,

Only there’s no next room and we’re the only ones

There, though just for a moment and a lifetime more.

Listen, I will tell you a secret, the secret you told

Me once on the train into the mountains

On the journey to the shore, a time long ago when

We spoke and never met. That secret, which is ours.

Some nights are so long the old dog comes home

To us who remain there waiting and waiting

Even if we’ve never been here before, where we are.

"
"







If you care about yourself at all, come to your own aid while 

                                   there's still time. 

                               Marcus Aurelius 3.14







Citizen of Rome, you are the center of the universe.

Problem is, circumference is—take a guess—me.

 

“Some things are impatient to be born

While others are impatient to die.” Don’t say

 

I did not warn you. Next time they swear

Shit happens, pop them square in the nose.

 

This will not help anybody, but helping is

The farthest thing from my imperial mind.

 

If you keep your spirit blameless and pure

People will drape you with laurels but

 

No one will have sex with you in backseats

Or marble mausoleums or anywhere else,

 

A small price to pay for honor and respect

Though not for me, being an emperor with no clothes.

 

Just pretend today is the last day of your life

And act accordingly—not that such strictures

 

Apply to Yours Truly, sports fans.

The forces of evil march on the fortress

 

Of your self. I wish I could explain why.

But what if evil did not exist and what if

 

Your self was no fortress, see what I mean?

Stoics get a bad name. Not in touch with feelings.

 Too rigid. Know-it-all cocksure mothers.

So the Stoics retain PR firms, don’t tell a soul.

 

If you really knew what was good for you,

And you do, why do you care I’ll flail you alive?

 

True, pissing off your emperor is a poor plan,

Even one like me mounted bare-assed on a steed.

 

Once upon a time, children…The story peters out.

Circus revels and gladiatorial raves—

 

Seen one, seem them all. Life is tiresome,

When will it end and will we ever notice?

 

I wish I knew. Really, I wish I cared.

My pal, Marcus Aurelius, natters day and night:

 

“Living is more like wrestling than dancing.”

Guess he never saw me take Molly at the club.

 

And he says we always have the option of

Having no opinion. Right. Like he knows.

 

OK, then, where did I put my pants?

"
"

                                           #1 [COLLEGE]

 

We packed your satchel with sweatshirts,

Soccer equipment, and The Elements of Style,

Loaded up the Hum Vee, a sad drive to JFK

And the cross-country flight to starting college,

where fortunately due to Advanced Placement

Courses you’ve already been awarded your MFA

And published your first book.

As we pulled out of the driveway, I slammed

On the brakes, and not on account of Jubilation,

The neighbor’s cat. “Stacey,” I said, “we have jumped the gun.”

“I didn’t know we had a gun, Pops,” you said.

“This is a figure of speech, a melonaphore.

But you can’t go to college yet,

Stacey, you’re barely by my count five years old.”

“That’s all right, Daddy-O, nice try.

But my name’s not Stacey.”

 

                                             #2 [PUPPY]

 

Love this puppy and your love will be repaid.

I can’t stress how little this will teach you about life.

Which it will. Which is a lot.

Sometimes, when you’re sad, I won’t know what to say.

Desire will cut into the bone.

So much we need to cover before you’re on your own.

This is a tea kettle, where goldfish won’t feel at home.

When I was your age, before you were born,

A war was almost certainly about to break out.

The Russians turned out to be just like us,

Only worse drivers, which is a lot like us, too.

I had a pet once, too, you know. An accordion.

Very tough to train, stained with fluids as it was

About which nothing further need be said.

Your questions matter. No, they really do.

I have no clue as to the white carnations,

No reason to suppose the stars were not meant for you.

 

                                              #3 [FISH]

 

“Do fish sleep?” I am so glad you asked. Once

Upon a time fish did not even catnap.

Childhood has reached a certain point.

More specific than that, I cannot be,

Or less. When you drive to Chartres

You can see it coming at you far away.

Never pass up a cathedral if you can.

Drink lots of water with the strawberries.

Leap before you look too hard, which makes

Things swim in your head, like fish that never sleep.

 

                                           #4 [BIRDS…]

 

“Time’s come to talk to you about the birds.”

“And the bees?”

“What do you know about the bees?”

“Was just asking.”

“A falcon is one bird you can’t keep in a cage,

I can’t explain why, though I might point

To history for many instructive precedents.”

“You have trouble explaining, Dad.”

“Anyway, what I like about birds is, they’re much

Like dreams—they fly in through a window

Where you didn’t know there was a window before.”

“I get it. We open to the known and discover

Mysteries left in their place, like putting under the pillow

A tooth that fell out and you come up with the cash

When you need it in the morning, for school.”

“Let’s stay focussed, Amy.” “Sure, Reginald.”

“I mind it that you call me Reginald, who’s he?”

“Someday, Dad, I may fall in love.”

“Let’s go back to the birds. I don’t want to say

Love is for the ornithologists, though such thoughts occur.

Maybe the real topic is experience.”

“I knew that.” “When?” “You told me.” “I never.”

“Didn’t have to.” “That’s how, you just know?”

“Life’s a vale of tears, Pops, except when it’s not.”

“Hence, sweetheart, some birds thrive in cages.”

“Name three.” “I want you to try on some wings.

I want you to take flight. Like the day I gave birth…”

“What?” “The day I gave birth to you was the day of days.”

“You feeling OK?” “The epidural worked like a charm,

I felt like I was swimming in air.” “I think you’re confused.”

“I wouldn’t be the first, but when they handed you to me

You nursed till you fell asleep.” “You’re talking about love.”

“And some bees sting.”

 

                                              #5 [BOND]

 

Once we had a bond, a sacred trust.

I carried you on my shoulders, we watched

The finches dart and feed, I read The Odyssey 

To you, which OK was a stretch, but who cared

You did not exist? Certainly, not me.

But take the example of Homer.

Would you just give me a chance?

There’s an old dog called Argus

Who waits for the hero to show before he dies.

I’m getting to the point. If we never had a dog

I would wait for you to arrive from a journey

Forced upon you by chance and fate.

You see, the whole thing’s about waiting.

There you are off-stage readying yourself

For a grand entrance into a life none of us

Heretofore presumed. I myself ache

Barometrically in concert with the coming storms.

If you never are, I have something left over

Even if it’s only me, watching you wade in, as if

You were a great swimmer and this world another shore.

"
"

I found my father’s favorite Swiss army knife

in a box he sent me with no note,

just James Bond videos,

nothing else.

What was the message?

 

The message was there wasn’t one.

 

This world violent, full of sex,

the movie’s zeitgeist, era after era, a new Bond

double-o-seven-ing in.

 

Divorced dad Sundays

at The Greenwich watching

the British Secret Service save the world.

 

I thought he sent the knife inadvertently,

but now I see it was code—

 

he was boxed in

without a knife

to cut himself out.

"
"







           The goal of the Meisner acting technique has often been described 

           as getting actors to ""live truthfully under imaginary circumstances.""

           Here are some acting games we have found useful. 







I.

THE REPETITION GAME:

The Moment is a Tricky Fucker"
"

Prologue Willy Loman’s reckless daughter flies quietly,fluttering like a silk-moth behind me

 blocking my life, my scenesin whichever stage direction she wants.

 Sometimes at night I can feel her dialing into me,her ringing calls like an imperial decree.

 When she sleeps she crashes, like a carinto the guardrail of my ambition.

 Her curse like a poison I cannot smell,an asphyxiation of the self by the self, that hell and hard sell.

 Split personalities, we dream through the night,of our merger and acquisition, in her half-moon light,

 Not even my husband can feelher there between us—a secret contract under seal.

 When I awaken, her irises touch mine;an awful, indecipherable fault line.

 She’s a character in search of an author, a devotee,trying to recount her history through me,

 until I channel her. She’s like a phantom limb,hymn to the invisible. Her shameless whims,

 the subtext of my lies. Under her tinted hairthe forest murmurs, becomes a thought, or prayer.

 Until her thoughts tumble into mine;colors bleed. In the morning, I’m overwrought—

 My patrilineal kin, she begins to wear thin,when she undoes hospital corners I’ve tucked so gently in.

 Her cool white rising is meringue completing—the high-pitched silence of our congealing.

 She was always ceremonially unfoldinghis white shirts, unpressing the folds

 in my circumstance. I did and didn’t want her. I kepttrying to catch her, then let her slip. Any intent

 to have her near made her more invisible. Her electricbreasts overfilled my brassieres. An interaction, our dialectic—

 She never removes her hat upon entering the doorto my personality. Ma semblable, ma soeur!

"
"

                              lunatuna

                              fluttering

below belly

pasiones swooping

                              down deep

gathering storms

                              treasuring

rainergías pacíficas

marítimas, montañescas

                              abotona tu vientre, maja

easles b ready

                              to capture flight

entre tus aguas claras

                              allow flow

               …reflect…

                              clama la milpa

               eye your center

cherish thigh

               hug torso

                              b one

               with duende within

               discover

                              sun risa raza roja

"
"

                              what for the rush and bloody pain

                              what for the blooming and the rain

                              what for the quest and odyssey

                              what for the swimming and the sea, see

                                    there b no shore or beach that anyone

can reach

                    and breathe, inhale, exhale, and love

all seems to ooze the stress that greed has carved in us

surely our species should be meek

    before our motherearth’s volcanoes

    storms and huracanes

    tornadoes, floods and tremors

and there we b secreting poisons for all leggeds, wingeds,

fish and even trees

 

                              what for the rush and bloody pain

                              we’ll surely die, but then

 

                we dig deeper in our heartmindspiritbody

and nurture glow and warmth

                    and light and peace and patience

and gladness and gardens

                              and gather all in oneness

and end the pain and bloody rush

     desiring naught

                              expecting naught

                    missing naught

simply being being

 

     we truly have no choice…though

 

we imagine, dream, hope, want

             being all that we are we are all that is

              and that is all there b

 

 

césar and corky

                                         this b my writ to chávez y gonzález

          carnales de las sonrisas grandes

                                         de las carcajadas llenas

                         de murales

                         de cuadros, ensayos

                         matadors de pendejadas

                         terminators of guandajos and juanabees

                                         hermanos, jefes

          your “death” is but our “birth”

                          porque amasteis

                                         entregasteis

y hoy, como siempre,

                          sois imprescindibles

"
"

As the father turns away from the thought

of his failure, the hands remove

his glasses and rub his eyes over

 

and over, drying the nonexistent tears.

Unknown to the one who is troubled

about losing his hair, his fingers stroke

 

his baldness as he speaks. The body,

our constant companion, understands

the loneliness of the hostess in her dark

 

driveway, embracing herself after the guests

who promised more and soon have gone,

and even visits the old schoolteacher

 

who reads the same happy ending to each

new class, working her toes in her shoes.

How could the people of the kingdom

 

not have known the curse of sorrow

was nothing more than a long sleep

they had only to wake from? In dreams

 

the body, which longs for transformation

too, suddenly lifts us above the dark

roofs of our houses, and far above

 

the streets of the town, until they seem

like any other small things fastened to earth.

"
"

In the apparent

vacancy beyond

each line, you might

sense the poem

 

waiting to think

itself. Imagine

the surface of a twilight

pond in wind,

 

shifting and changing

the sky, then

going still

as a concentrating mind,

 

the far trees

deepening

in its reflection.

Like the poem

 

the pond’s alive—

its beauty (the sudden

scintillation of a hundred

thousand wavelets)

 

and music (the percussion

of a beaver’s tail)

arising from what is.

And when the pond

 

accumulates

the darkness,

which it loves,

it challenges your eyes

 

to find the light

that without darkness

you could not see.

Wild campsites

 

you never noticed

now appear

along the far shore.

It’s not only itself

 

the poem waits for

moving line by line

into its own dark.

It waits for you.

"
"

It must be difficult for God, listening

to our voices come up through his floor

of cloud to tell Him what’s been taken away:

Lord, I’ve lost my dog, my period, my hair,

all my money. What can He say, given

we’re so incomplete we can’t stop being

surprised by our condition, while He

is completeness itself? Or is God more

like us, made in His image—shaking His head

because He can’t be expected to keep track

of which voice goes with what name and address,

He being just one God. Either way, we seem

to be left here to discover our losses, everything

from car keys to larger items we can’t search

our pockets for, destined to face them

on our own. Even though the dentist gives us

music to listen to and the assistant looks down

with her lovely smile, it’s still our tooth

he yanks out, leaving a soft spot we ponder

with our tongue for days. Left to ourselves,

we always go over and over what’s missing—

tooth, dog, money, self-control, and even losses

as troubling as the absence the widower can’t stop

reaching for on the other side of his bed a year

later. Then one odd afternoon, watching something

as common as the way light from the window

lingers over a vase on the table, or how the leaves

on his backyard tree change colors all at once

in a quick wind, he begins to feel a lightness,

as if all his loss has led to finding just this.

Only God knows where the feeling came from,

or maybe God’s not some knower off on a cloud,

but there in the eye, which tears up now

at the strangest moments, over the smallest things.

"
"

Dawn marks the wall

 

a thin flange of

off-blue

 

An imagined

silence

 

Always an imagined

silence

 

The speed

at which sleep’s

fogged dialogue withers

 

into the present

noun-scape

 

This rift valley

 

A volley of

seasonal beacons

 

Window

where mind

 

finds orbit

 

     +

 

All a world can do

is appear

 

The window

intones

 

A room

whose walls

 

warp with sun

 

What’s seen

is dreamed

 

We think

ourselves here

"
"

In a patch of sunlight

a decapitated grasshopper

twitches. The sunlight twitches.

Sky the size of a sky imagined.

 

Squint to see the quarter moon

—shallow gash on blue horizon.

Squint to hear beyond windows

wafting muzak. I’m half-awake

 

in this field of turned-on particulars.

A wreck of yellow blossoms

under a barn-door window.

 

A barn door without the barn.

 

"
"

To imagine a morning

 

the first

sounds from the street

 

and the house, its halls

 

scarifying

consciousness

 

Antique glass

smudges limbs

 

(more blue

than green)

 

flared out

over a roof

 

To imagine

the raw circumference

 

of a field

as it wakes

 

what we make of it

 

where our senses

send us

 

 

Gray oscillates gray

and the mountain

 

a line

lodged within it

 

gone slack at the end

 

 

No need

to mention

weather

 

The yard—

the measure

 

An unkempt

garden bed

convulses

 

synchronous

with traffic

 

flashing through

the fence

 

 

Stone bench

in a ring of weeds

 

Shadows ring—

a sound

 

Bees doused in

viscous sun,

erased

"
"

What I’ve come to discuss is mostly about shadows

and the airs left behind in caring, discarding,

the long inhibitions of whereso and when.

Alabaster, a dark quire, in its many pages and premises

the maze, from which move

tendrilled purples and contusions, magnificent

fuchsia receivers of false content,

the splayed flower, arterial, like the premise of a door

is where it leads to or from. Communication

of vessel, vial, capsule, hull, a tiniest nil

fires the neurons from their swooning stall,

is not a healing but adaptation to same

a quickening in deleting of sensation

a prior sizing. Stacked leaves (green shadows)

are givens in the columned garden, what work is needed

to determine that shape? Some hysteric

trope of repetition, rage for accretion,

dazed by its own mute replication,

like the minute lines of a hand. They are

its cries (writes Ponge, among others),

the tongue inseparable from its utterance (langue).

We weep to hear it, a language forgot.

I was saying I keep speaking

from some chamber sound deleted, which is why

I never call or write. In that theatre are many eclipses

and moons refracted in pinholes and wheels

wherein revolve astonished birds, and the Queen of Night

sleeps a rest restorative and profitable, and

andante allegro, the dead ships never sail.

"
"

1.

Bridge’s absence gave the creek a new aspect.

Uncrossable, irascible. Crosser stems

on the bank with her will and form,

extension “Phantom of incapacity

which is me.” Bright roar of water,

x of indomitability.

 

 

2.

 

The bridge is not an x. It bridges nothing.

The turmoil is only a portion.

 

 

3.

 

Bridge on the grass is brideless.

Tufts of terra like a bloom in air.

Rational slats, a surface’s accretion,

slat system. Grass tints it, heliotropic

emanation, sharp, up, or complex

occupation in shiving rain.

 

 

4.

 

Creek’s uncrossability, a new beauty.

“It looked like the process of a thinking,

deep run.” It became the suffering of form

and mute suggestion. The syllables

were not perennial. They broke and grew.

 

 

5.

 

The blue pants of the crosser were neither sky

nor water. They orient to the body

as form and boundary. The crosser’s green shirt

neither grass nor leaf-thought.

Desire to not get wet, another hurt.

 

 

6.

 

“Glamour of limit, where the rocks just slant”

down the bank, in a wet

 

stratification, and the creek

spills blows and goings

and is omniform leaving, a prime of seem.

 

 

7.

 

High water as a contour of relation

swells, hurls. The creek which was other

but not antipodal, or refusal. “The wish

to touch it with my phenomenal hand”

loves it as material.

 

 

8.

 

The bridge made the force containable.

Bridgeless the crosser sits, and very still.

“My phenomenal body crosses and longs.”

Ceaseless body of the audible.

"
"







with a mournful but driving feel, in Bm, 2/2 time







in the dark, in the bitter wind

listen to a dream

grandmothers stand

shoulder to shoulder, on the rim of a hill

bend as one, and grasp one thing together

ask them, in the dream world, why

do they cry? they will show you in reply

their shawls of many colours, spread these wings

sweep you in, teach you how

once a year, in the dark of the year we wash

the whole world in a day—for one day, we cry until they're home, until they all are home 

from one dawn to the next mourning

for the broken wailing for regrets

love lost, wrong words, wrong actions

unbalanced moments and all the cracks between heart

and heart, parent and child

lover and beloved friend, nation and nation

creature, and creature of another kind

for what we choose and what we neglect to choose

for what we wish we'd known

for each hand unclasped tongue unbridled

one whisper falling short of hearduntil they're home, until they are all home 

the bread far from   the hunger                                         the apology

the confusion            the broken road 

       

these things we gather in this blanket

bone and sand and sage

we wash the world, between us

hold this blanket, fill it with our tears

and when we have cried

from one dawn to the next

then we will rise, and we will dance until they're home, until they all are home 

lay your hands upon the truth of beauty's loss

heavy, soft as moss, this blanket

full of tears and dust and dying

becomes ocean cradle, healing, dark

the promise, washed clean by our sorrow

today crying out, as we're birthing tomorrow

not so much redemption

as the law of moon and season

calls for justice

one day, the lawmakers must

exit their echoing halls, fall in

with the grandmothers dancing

carry it                 cry it clean until they're home, until they are all home 

until light through their bodies

translates to rainbows hung over the land

until light through their bodies

translates to rainbows strung over this land

until light through our bodies

translates to rainbows shining over our land until we're home, until we all are home

"
"







(Skellig Michael) does not belong to any world that you and I have lived and worked in: it is part of our dream world…then (heading back) we were pursued by terrors, ghost from Michael…

                                               George Bernard Shaw







                     I

 

The ferry furrows

the foam,

leaving a wake

that quickly settles

and forgets us,

as it has forgotten

all those

who’ve opened these waters:

fisherman, monk, pilgrim and pagan,

some foundering here.

Our mainland

world diminishes.

There is respite.

A cloud engulfs us

out of nowhere

as if the miraculous

were about to appear.

The veil lifts

to reveal the small Skellig

and Skellig Michael

rising like chapel and cathedral.

 

                      II

 

We forget speech, hypnotized by the climb,

concentrating on narrow, rock-hewn steps

that spiral up like the gyres

of the Book of Kells, whirling in labyrinths

of knowledge, turmoil and eternity.

They lead to the beehive huts and oratories

packed with a congregation of sightseers

who whisper in disbelief and reverence

at how those sometime monks lived

in this wind-tugged cloister of shells.

 

We browse in each dome’s live absence

and picnic above the graveyard

that’s no bigger than a currach

with a crucifix for helmsman

navigating his crew to the island of the dead.

We’re eyed by the staunch, monkish puffins.

Our tongues loosen, but, in keeping

with the somberness of this sun-haloed place,

we chat about the world with an earnestness

that would embarrass us on the mainland.

 

You tell of medieval monks charting world maps

with countries drawn as humans gorging upon

each other’s entangled bodies. We go on to

the lands and demons of the world of poetry.

I’m flummoxed when you ask what poetry is.

I recall how the earliest musical instruments

were hewn out of bones, and that poets

carve their words out of those gone before.

They are the primitive musicians who beat

and blow words back to life. More than that I don’t know.

 

                      III

 

[…]

 

That dusk at Dún an Óir we slaughtered even

the pregnant, whimpering women methodically

while a bloodstained sun drowned in the ocean.

Each fetus struggled in the belly

of each slain mother as desperately

as a lobster dropped in a boiling pot.

Had shed blood been ink, I could still be

quilling The Faerie Queene, but I did not

allow a drop to blot a mere sonnet

that you, trapped in complicity, can never

quite break free of. Admit it, hypocrite!

In your time few are not guilty of slaughter.

Even the page you’ll pen this upon is of pine

that Amazonians were shot for. I could go on.

                                                                                   (Edmund Spenser)

I lifted the pitch of my grief

    above the storm-lashing waves

for my world breaking on the reefs

    of foreign, land-grabbing knaves,

 

who ignore dependence upon

    the lowliest plants and creatures

as the hermit crab and cloak anemone

    depend on one another.

 

But no matter what, you must

    keen for the world’s theft

as I keened mine, despite knowing

    soon no one may be left.

 

                                                                                   (Aodhagán Ó Rathaille)

Lend an ear to one of your own kind

   and do not let yourself be caught

by the winds of lust, like Dante’s starlings

   blown this way and that by every gust.

 

I myself was borne on this wind

   as I rode across country,

always wary that around the next bend

   my life would catch up with me.

My rakish ways squandered energy

   that I should have instilled in song,

more worthy of the muse-gift given to me

   than my odd aisling,

 

Pay particular heed to me, especially

   since your word-talent is less than mine.

I’m still too bushed to eke out a last line.

                                                                                    (Eoghan Rua Ó Súilleabháin)

Sing up front,

cold-shouldering

the fashionable

low key of your time,

closed, cautious and crabbit

as a farmer.

 

Sing as open-throated

as my curlew keen.

I supped the red wine

of Art’s blood

as he lay slain,

already becoming Cork mud.

 

Sing as full-throated

as my unmatched plaint;

matching my words

to his cold body

that would never again

rouse to my touch.

My hands wept

that day’s icy rain

as I swore to undo

that kowtowing

dribble of a man

who slew my Art

of the winged white horse.

 

The spirit of that mare

I rode fleeter than any hare,

fleeter than any deer,

fleeter than the wind

through Munster’s open country.

 

Sing your provenance,

our elder province.

                                                                                     (Eibhlín Dubh Ní Chonaill)

I sang not for my own or for beauty's sake

as much as to keep our spirits fired, 

knowing as long as we sang we'd not break, 

refusing to allow the country be shired.

But it was too much when even our lands

turned hostile and drove us like lapwings

in the hard winter, together in dying bands,

our swollen bellies pregnant with nothing. 

Even the birds seemed to give up singing. 

So I lay down and relinquished song.

But I should have kept up my amhrán-ing, 

adapting and transmuting their tongue. 

Transform the spirit of where you belong, 

make something right out of what's wrong. 

                                                                                     (Tomás Rua Ó Súilleabháin)

Tell of those weather-sketched

    Attic islanders

who half-tamed their school

    of rocky Blaskets,

water spouting from the blowholes

    of cliffs. 

Tell how they were forced

    from their Ithaca,

still dreaming in the surf-rush 

    of Irish,

the inland longing for the lilt

    of the sea.

In them uncover the destiny

   of everyone,

for all are exiled and in search 

    of a home,

as you settle the eroding 

    island of each poem. 

                                                                                        (Robin Flower)

[…]

The islands' standing army

of gannets fiercely snap,

stab and peck one another.

Few could match

the spite I unleashed 

on any who encroached 

into my territory. I spat 

with petrel accuracy. 

I should have had the wisdom 

of the sad-eyed puffins 

who let everyone come close,

sensing few mean hurt, 

though when forced to tussle

they'll show their worth. 

So learn from me. 

When I come to mind

don't recall how, feisty, 

I knocked nests of words

over the edge,

splattering on the rocks 

the crude squwaks of other 

ravaging, wing-elbowing birds; 

rather think of the winged poems 

I hatched, seen, 

regardless of time and place, 

gliding and gyring 

with their own grace. 

                                                                                          (Patrick Kavanagh)

Life when it is gone is like a woman

you were glad to be quit of only to find

yourself years later longing for her,

catching her scent on a crowded street. 

Tell us of the seagull plundering your picnic 

before it wakes you. Tell us of the rain

tapping a pane while you're ensconced

by the fire cradling a pregnant brandy glass. 

                                                                                            (Louis MacNeice)

Can you still hear a distant train whistle blow? 

Wet my whistle with a slug of Guinness.

What is the texture of fresh-fallen snow?

Do girls still wear their hair in braid?

What's tea? What's the smell of the sea?

Tell me. Tell me. I am beginning to fade.

          

                                                                                             (Dylan Thomas)

                      IV

The alarming, silhouetted bird

has a preternatural quality 

as it flutters about

my head, drawing me

from sleep's underworld. 

I resist its pull. 

Everything turns

into dream's usual montage. 

Another figure emerges 

but says nothing, 

as if that's what he came to say. 

His face merges into

one of a gagged female. 

She shimmers and vanishes. 

Dolphins break

beyond Blind Man's Cove,

returning the dead

to Bull Island, transmitting

their encrypted, underwater Morse. 

The savant local ferryman

informs us that Skellig Michael

was once a druidic site. 

His oil-wrinkled hands tug

the engine cord,

coaxing our boat

out of the cliff-shaded cove.

We withdraw

into the distance, 

leaving a disgruntling sense

that we've only touched the tip

of these dark icebergs. 

 

   

 

"
"

That sound Arvo Pärt does with one piano note

stars split, fade, wander

in cosmic expansion—

 

First responder’s genesis and torch of

metadatacrunch tumbling in a 

burnt and weedy churchyard

equal parts Lethe and lithe—

Grass, is it hollow, hallow

to wake no longer among

mortals? The woman her dress flowered

from a blown ceiling silver-rosed—

Flat plasm’s

archangel coming clear out

of sheetrock and screen

shield and spear in hand

let us do all the cooking 

if she will lead the pack, remember the route, read the waters—

After the great fire we

tread river’s late cream and flare.

We woke in a city.

Where who slew us into portions

on a block out of earth

gathered our limbs 

and we were allowed to continue 

unhunted. If “if” is the one word one is given with God 

to explain how one survived.

Oh.  Ah.  Siren,

white cockatoo

meets deep

blue. 

Fog.  Pour ammonia

on coyote 

scat.

"
"

It was a vertical time. It was the expression, a spirit giving way onto an electric barren. We

circled and were encircled and had no cause. It was a time of the self come on in a field of

apparatuses. It was vignetted by sleep, and the sleep was in its center breached. Cold moving

through the smell of gas. The big-leafed enclosure. It was a time that clattered at the horizons,

whose recounting was already foreclosed, as in a numeral smudged in powder, as in a thin water

making of the atmosphere a disc. It was a time of guzzling. A time amid what has been kept, a

time of calendered trust, repeated appeal, erasures of flight. We begin with a weedy stem drawn

against the winter sky. Dear hierophant, our decision initialed. The muffled sound of the closet

and the machine.

"
"

The bottoms of my shoes 

     are clean 

From walking in the rain

"
"

In my medicine cabinet

the winter fly

Has died of old age

"
"

Useless! Useless! 

—heavy rain driving

into the sea

"
"

I broke at last

the terror-fringed fascination

that bound my ancient gaze

to those crowding faces

of plunder and seized my

remnant life in a miracle

of decision between white-

collar hands and shook it

like a cheap watch in

my ear and threw it down

beside me on the earth floor

and rose to my feet. I

made of their shoulders

and heads bobbing up and down

a new ladder and leaned

it on their sweating flanks

and ascended till midair

my hands so new to harshness

could grapple the roughness of a prickly

day and quench the source

that fed turbulence to their

feet. I made a dramatic

descent that day landing

backways into crouching shadows

into potsherds of broken trance. I

flung open long-disused windows

and doors and saw my hut

new-swept by rainbow brooms

of sunlight become my home again

on whose trysting floor waited

my proud vibrant life.

"
"

Hurrah! to them who do nothing

see nothing feel nothing whose

hearts are fitted with prudence

like a diaphragm across

womb’s beckoning doorway to bar

the scandal of seminal rage. I’m

told the owl too wears wisdom

in a ring of defense round

each vulnerable eye securing it fast

against the darts of sight. Long ago

in the Middle East Pontius Pilate

openly washed involvement off his

white hands and became famous. (Of all

the Roman officials before him and after

who else is talked about

every Sunday in the Apostles’ Creed?) And

talking of apostles that other fellow

Judas wasn’t such a fool

either; though much maligned by

succeeding generations the fact remains

he alone in that motley crowd

had sense enough to tell a doomed

movement when he saw one

and get out quick, a nice little

packet bulging his coat pocket

into the bargain—sensible fellow.

 September 1970

"
"







(for Niyi Osundare)







Something in altitude kindles power-thirst

Mere horse-height suffices the emir

Bestowing from rich folds of prodigious turban

Upon crawling peasants in the dust

Rare imperceptible nods enwrapped

In princely boredom.

 

I too have known

A parching of that primordial palate,

A quickening to manifest life

Of a long recessive appetite.

Though strapped and manacled

That day I commanded from the pinnacle

Of a three-tiered world a bridge befitting

The proud deranged deity I had become.

A magic rug of rushing clouds

Billowed and rubbed its white softness

Like practiced houri fingers on my sole

And through filters of its gauzy fabric

Revealed wonders of a metropolis

Magic-struck to fairyland proportions.

By different adjustments of vision

I caused the clouds to float

Over a stilled landscape, over towers

And masts and smoke-plumed chimneys;

Or turned the very earth, unleashed

From itself, a roaming fugitive

Beneath a constant sky. Then came

A sudden brightness over the world,

A rare winter’s smile it was, and printed

On my cloud carpet a black cross

Set in an orb of rainbows. To which

Splendid nativity came–who else would come

But gray unsporting Reason, faithless

Pedant offering a bald refractory annunciation?

But oh what beauty! What speed!

A chariot of night in panic flight

From Our Royal Proclamation of the rites

Of day! And riding out Our procession

Of fantasy We slaked an ancient

Vestigial greed shriveled by ages of dormancy

Till the eyes exhausted by glorious pageantries

Returned to rest on that puny

Legend of the life jacket stowed away

Of all places under my seat.

 

Now I think I know why gods

Are so partial to heights—to mountain

Tops and spires, to proud iroko trees

And thorn-guarded holy bombax,

Why petty household divinities

Will sooner perch on a rude board

Strung precariously from brittle rafters

Of a thatched roof than sit squarely

On safe earth.

"
"

I don’t mind the ring roads

or the strange intersections,

 

filled in with radio music    tarmac

skirting streetlight and         the dissolving      moon.

 

Wing mirrors tell

of running trees.

 

My heart races

in the heave of the wind.

 

In the pivot of glass everything

is so small and manageable.

 

I think of an old song,

of purple cows in far fields,

 

I wonder what it’d take

to cover miles and miles

with no maps or destination.

 

It is not easy anymore

 

to forget or be free of the bear

that roams the place where I come from.

"
"

Among heart-shaped leaves

the white fish gleams, red tail. 

Soft lotuses sleep. 

"
"







''At one time, I dreaded everything I was making.' 

Yayoi Kusama (Winter 1999)







First it is just a measling of the tablecloth

but soon it spills

in all colours, all gaiety:

                           desk        floor        lamp        flowers

          tatami, my underwear

 

then dares to paw across

         Mother’s face, so

smilingdelirious.

 

Twenty years

in a twelve square metre room

with the thuds of tennis balls

the only music

 

tells me

that suffering

is necessary

 

and more powerful

than healing

 

and I wish

to cover all territory

for once—hospital beds, chinaware,

bed linen, your bland skin

 

with the pattern and fear of all my dots—

by the old wharf on Naoshima

I make my yellow wartime pumpkins.

 

I know my home is not a country anymore,

just a festering colony of the mind:

 

these shuddering trees

that come and talk to me each night,

the whispers of the white nurses

and the star-dances

of my Japanese kaleidoscope.

Come haunt me still. Do what you may.

I won’t return. I’m not afraid.

"
"

I’m terrified of a number of fates,

Poisoned water under a tyrant’s wage,

Being fired for doing nothing, my parents dying,

Committing a thought like this to the page,

The splash of acid to the face

The Queens non-profit boss received

Leaving work one blue August evening. Hell’s

So eloquent and poetry’s no fate at all

Unless you count the story of the divided sea

Waiting to wash its assassins away.

Says the Pharaoh, “That’s so sad.”

But that story is less fate than news, whereas

That Queens boss? Permanently burned, the Times

Says one eye won’t stop weeping.

"
"

Know no name

Why this holy day honed

Hollow day haul

I lost wind when wooden

I can’t bear to be

Unaided in hunt unhanded

To haunt when strewn sound

Who will be held in hand

Brought sent

Mooring at the shore

Who’re you for

For what fewer who wore

Be called this wooer

More who are the ones

In horror to light will strew

then sue for war

"
"

Silence is the sound the knife makes

slitting the skin.

Can you identify my weakness,

a pricking sensation

and numbness in one limb?

Can you hold this tongue?

Tell me, what is the function

of meticulous courage.

You are the most yourself

when you are in the motion.

One can be quick and too quick.

I have a stomach too.

It gets hungry.

If I be of necessity

opportunity,

if there be the slightest chance of success,

why have a mind, if?

Does that scream in the night across the alley

beg an answer? Are we crowning

into the sludge of an injury and its repair?

An elephant is larger and stronger than a horse;

but it is not preferred as a beast of burden.

Strength is a wee umbrella

in the storm.

This the friction sound heard

in inspiration, expiration, or both.

For convenience of description,

blood is bright red and frothy.

Have you earned the privilege

of making mistakes?

There really is no sex in science.

The nomenclature lifts

delicate subjects up from the plane

in which language places them.

Man has more strength,

woman, more endurance.

The hands and the instruments

are the chief sources of danger.

This fever.

There is no subject on which so much has been written

                                                                             and so little known.

"
"

At the top of a hill each morning,

I wait for the bus by the donut store.

Its pink sign looks hot,

curls, like a rope, a stem to a brain.

You turn toward a jade

at the height of your neighborhood,

stop at a light in its gut.

The sun starts to seep up,

reaching all grasses and grooves of the city.

A white bus with black windows passes.

A few minutes later, the city bus arrives like a room.

It crawls warm and dull to the west edge,

breathing its heat, a few baby hands

warming wide glass.

The billboard at my stop displays a large number to call.

A man walks his sniffing dog below it,

sharp legs brushing wild onion.

At the base of the hill,

I enter my code,

push the gray gate open,

allow the worn loop of my bag

down my arm, walk to my station.

I drop the metal end of a hose

into a bucket, turn the tough faucet.

Traveling after the sound,

the cold rushes out

full force from the rubber,

breaking into itself, interrupting and filling

the round plastic space.

Hungry, I pick up the water.

"
"

I am so done with feeling

Xmas Amaryllis grow

in places where thralls go free

I am not quite enough

for the woodland; promoting myself again

after all accused men have been named

In Casablanca I wait for livestock

to come through luxe doors

for thighs to grow less through absorption

My killer is not going to be invited to this

Ornamenting party and I am blue daisies

casting O’s wide in anointment

Now that he’s gone I am free to torch down the

Valley                        la spiaggia of pure

Purple                         small neck in hand

"
"

Bless Tuesday, blessed Monday.

Bless the word week, its seven

small days trail with y.

Bless the men whose words

I was too young to hear.

A whisper loves a canal.

Bless my laugh, lent by grief,

I have so little left to borrow.

But my hair, it grows—

if hair be gold, cut mine so

I might rid my beloved

of his student loans. Bless

thieves, universities, those

hands caress what’s not theirs.

Bless thinking it was yours.

Here are hands, blessed one.

Bless them holding the door.

Bless each crier on the F

train before and after me

as they blush, as they transfer

into tunnels for the red line.

Oh bless, bless wildly, what

remains to be done. Bless

the one who told me so,

the ones who didn’t.

Even weak breaths bless.

Bless weakness, fragile fortress,

my friend’s body absent

of soundness. Bless the sound

of someone reliable answering

your call, saying If you’re going

through hell, Hello."
"

       when the cultivators of corpses are busy seeding

plague across vast acres of the land, choking schools

       and churches in the motley toxins of grief, breeding

virile shoots of violence so soon verdant even fools

       fear to tread in their wake :: when all known tools

of resistance are clutched in the hands of the vile

       like a wilting bouquet, cut from their roots, while

 

the disempowered slice smiles across their own faces

       and hide the wet knives in writhing thickets of hair

for future use :: when breathing in the ashen traces

       of dreams deferred, the detonator’s ticking a queer

echo that amplifies instead of fading :: when there-

       you-are is where-you-were and the sunset groans

into the atlantic, setting blue fire to dark white bones.

"
"

the 14-year-old girl was treated like:

        (a) a grown woman.

        (b) a grown man.

 

the bikini-clad girl was handled by the cop like:

        (a) a prostitute.

        (b) a prostitute by her pimp.

 

the girl was slung to the ground like:

        (a) a sack of garbage into a dumpster.

        (b) somebody had something to prove.

 

the girl’s braids flew around her head like:

        (a) helicopter blades.

        (b) she’d been slapped.

 

the black girl was pinned to the ground like:

        (a) an amateur wrestler in a professional fight.

        (b) swimming in a private pool is a threat to national security.

 

the girl’s cries sounded like:

        (a) the shrieks of children on a playground.

        (b) the shrieks of children being torn from their mothers.

 

the protesting girl was shackled like:

        (a) a criminal.

        (b) a runaway slave.

 liken it or not

 

          —mckinney, texas, june 2015

 

"
"

And now, reader, I come to a period in my unhappy life,

which I would gladly forget if I could. Asia Graves looks straight ahead as she calmly recalls the night a man paid $200 on a Boston street to have sex with her.

 

 

                                                        The remembrance fills me with sorrow and shame. “If you 

                                                        want attention and you see that you’re getting it, you just follow your 

                                                        feelings,” senior Araceli Figueroa, 17, said. “It’s sad.”

 

 

It pains me to tell you of it; but I have promised to tell you

the truth, and I will do it honestly, let it cost me what it

may. A plague more commonly associated with other countries has

been taking young victims in the United States, one by one."
"

To each orphaned child—so long as you remain close enough to walk to

your living kin you will dance, feast, feel community in food. This cannot

stand. Eighty acres allotted.

 

To each head of household—so long as you remember your tribal words

for village you will recollect that the grasses still grow and the rivers still

flow. So long as you teach your children these words they will remember

as well. This we cannot allow. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.

 

To each elder unable to till or hunt—so long as your old and injurious habits

sing out over the drum or flicker near the fire you cripple our reward. We

seek to hasten your end. Eighty acres allotted.

 

To each widowed wife—so long as you can make your mark, your land

may be leased. A blessing on your mark when you sign it and walk closer

to your favored white sister. Eighty acres allotted.

 

To each full blood—so long as you have an open hand, we shall fill it with

a broken ploughshare. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.

 

To each half blood, each quarter strain—so long as you yearn for the broken

ploughshare, you will be provided a spade honed to razor in its place.

When every acre of your allotment has been leased or sold, you will turn it

on yourself. From that date begins our real and permanent progress.

 

"
"

I use a trick to teach students

how to avoid passive voice.

 

Circle the verbs.

Imagine inserting “by zombies”

after each one.

 

Have the words been claimed

by the flesh-hungry undead?

If so, passive voice.

 

I wonder if these

sixth graders will recollect,

on summer vacation,

as they stretch their legs

on the way home

from Yellowstone or Yosemite

and the byway’s historical marker

beckons them to the

site of an Indian village—

 

Where trouble was brewing.

Where, after further hostilities, the army was directed to enter. 

Where the village was razed after the skirmish occurred.

Where most were women and children.

 

Riveted bramble of passive verbs

etched in wood—

stripped hands

breaking up from the dry ground

to pinch the meat

of their young red tongues.

"
"

We are so honored that

              you are here, they said.

We know that this is

             your homeland, they said.

The admission price

             is five dollars, they said.

Here is your button

             for the event, they said.

It means so much to us that

             you are here, they said.

We want to write

             an apology letter, they said.

Tell us what to say.

 

 

"
"

Finding myself in a mesmeric orientation,

before me appeared Benjamin Franklin,

who magnetized his French paramours

at dinner parties as an amusing diversion

from his most serious studies of electricity

and the ethereal fire. I like thinking about

how he would have stood on tiptoe to kiss

their buzzing lips and everyone would gasp

and clap for the blue spark between them.

I believe in an honest and forthright manner,

a democracy of plain speech, so I have to

find a way to explain I don’t care to have sex

anymore. Once I was a high school teacher

and there was a boy who everyday came in late,

who only came to school at all to sell drugs

out of his backpack, upon which he laid

his head like a pillow and closed his eyes

while I pointed at a chart diagramming

the anatomy of a sparrow. The vice principal

was watching and taking notes as I taught

this class, so I slid the bag from under

his cheek, as if not to wake him, wrapped

his fingers around a pen. I was trying

to be a gentle mother and also trying

to show I was in control of an unstable

situation. The boy, also trying to be

in control of himself, walked so slow

to my desk and we stood to watch him

push everything—binders, piles of ungraded

papers, a beaker of red pens to the floor.

He was so calm. How do you like it when I touch your things. I do not like it. I live

in a house with many blue mason jars,

each containing a feather collection or starfish

collection or vertebrae collection, and also

there is a fully articulated fetal alligator skeleton.

Each window is pressed by the design

of a sweet-gum branch, all the little orange

and red stars of its leaves, you can’t see

the perfect geometry this close, just haphazard

parabolas, but beneath the foundation

the roots mirror the branching. I have

a chart of this to pull down. The view is flat

and so quiet on the inside. Have I been

forthright yet? What I want to know is

what happens if I decide to never have sex

again? Or more precisely, can I decide

to not have sex again and still be kind?

And be a joy to others? I should mention

I am a wife. I should mention I was told

my sole purpose is to be joy to others.

The sidewalks outside are very full of people

and when I look at them I feel hopeless.

Benjamin Franklin was so jolly with his kite

and his key and his scandalous electricity.

He was so in love with women and drink

and democracy. Before I was this way,

I was not a house, I was just a jar and what

I wanted was to be broken. A cool trick

you can do that I once showed a class is crank

a wheel covered in felt against another felt

wheel. Static bristles and sparks and makes

your hair stand on end. But hook it to

a Leyden jar and the electricity fills up

in there, invisible as air. Becomes a glass

battery, until you too much the thing, then

wow! broken glass everywhere. I remember

wanting that. Do I have to always want that?

My house is blue and quiet. I can hardly

hear the squirrel in my sweet-gum tree

dancing like a sunbeam to sing his riddles:

“A house full, a hole full, but you cannot

gather a bowl full.” The air of everywhere

is wet with electric fluid, you can’t even tell,

but pop, whiz, everywhere. “In this

field,” Ben says, “the soul has room

enough to expand, to display all of her

extravagances.” The sweet gum has 10,000

sticky, spiky seed balls. They start green

but grow black and fall for want of

a barren season. They look like sea urchins.

I call them tree urchins and think it’s

a funny joke. I don’t tell it to anyone,

as I am tired of being told what is not.

Such a secret, I know, is an extravagance,

and I like best how it’s an extravagance so

small you must keep it in a jar with others

of its kind for it to ever mean anything at all.

"
"

My child is sitting cross-legged on the floor reading to herself.

Sometimes she is so full of need I push her to the floor.

Only once I did that and I don’t even remember the moment

right, but I was trying to wipe urine off my leg and she was

naughty like a squirrel and jumping and singing and her head

slammed into my chin, which hurt and even more than that,

it pissed me off, because she’s my beautiful child, but in that

button snap of a moment she was suddenly just one more person

and I pushed her away in a way that felt to me like setting her

down, but awkwardly, because of how she was also balancing

her feet on my feet as I tried to pour out a bowl of pee

from her little potty as a toothbrush dangled foaming

from my mouth. Somewhere in the mess of that morning

she’d become person enough to, in the space between us,

create force of momentum, and then I did not set her down,

but pushed her and she fell away from it against the wall

and was crying because I, her mommy, pushed her. And I know

this should be the poem about how I’m horrified at myself,

the poem about what in ourselves we have to live with,

but in that moment which followed two years of breastfeeding

and baby-wearing and sixty-nine hours of natural childbirth

and the hemorrhaging and the uncertain operation, after which

I pumped every two hours, careful not to let the cord tangle

in the IV. Even then when she cried and no matter what

and no matter and no matter and no matter and no matter what,

I held her all night if she cried so she would not ever know

someday you’ll cry alone, but I held her and ached and leaked

and bled too as long as it took. Of course there’ve been nights

since but sometimes it feels as if I’ve never been asleep again,

so when I say I pushed my two-year-old against a wall and I don’t

remember it happening that way but it happened and I did

and I’ve been wondering a long time now what the limit is

and when I would find the end of myself, and that day, which

was yesterday, was the end. And this day, when we played

hide-and-seek with Daddy, and touched bugs, and readFrog and Toad Are Friends twice together before she read it

to herself as I wrote this, this is the day that comes after.

"
"

The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is in her eighties

and she underestimates the value of everything, for which I am grateful.

 

Lightly used snow suits, size 2T, are $6 and snow boots are $3.

 

There is a little girl, maybe seven, fiddling with a tea set. Her mother

inspects drapes for stains.

 

Sometimes the very old and lonely are looking for an opening.

 

She glances up from her pricing and says something about the tea set

and a baby doll long ago.

 

I am careful not to make eye contact, but the mother with drapes has

such softness in her shoulders and her face and she knows how to say

the perfect kind thing—“What a wonderful mother you had.”

 

“Yes, she was.”

 

Why do children sometimes notice us and sometimes not?

 

From the bin of dolls: “What happened to your mother?”

 

“She died.”

 

The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is crying a little.

She seems surprised to be crying. “It’s been eighty years and I still miss

her.”

 

When my daughter was born I couldn’t stop thinking about how we

were going to die. If we were drowning, would it be better to hold her

to me even as she fought away or should I let her float off to wonder why

her mother didn’t help her? What if it’s fire and I have one bullet left? I

made sure my husband knew if there were death squads and he had to

choose, I’d never love him again if he didn’t choose her. If I’m lucky,

her crying face is the last thing I’ll see.

 

The mother with drapes is squeezing her daughter’s shoulder, trying to

send a silent message, but children are children. “Why did she die?”

 

“She was going to have a baby and—And she died.”

 

“But she was a wonderful mother.”

 

I’m holding a stack of four wooden jigsaw puzzles of farm animals,

dinosaurs, jungle animals, and pets. Each for a quarter.

 

“It’s silly how much I still miss her.” She takes out a tissue and wipes

her eyes and then her nose.

 

When my grandmother threw her sister, Susie, a 90th birthday party,

one hundred people came, including 5 of the 6 brothers and sisters. At

dusk only a few of us were left, nursing beers with our feet kicked up

on the bottom rungs of various walkers.

 

Susie said then to my grandmother, “Can you think of all the people

watching us in heaven now? And our mother must be in the front row.”

 

Grandma took her sister’s hand. “Our mother—Estelle.”

 

“Yes—her name was Estelle. I forgot that.”

 

They looked so happy then, saying her name back and forth to each

other. Estelle. Estelle.

"
"

We were given a curfew on the second day.

Clouds filling windows were replaced by soot

and ash from the burned out market on the corner.

We lost the smell of buttered beetroot, Wissotzky tea

and kishke; a tendril of root infiltrated a crack

in the floorboards. We kept our distance and let it grow

in disbelief. Someone said we should kill it

before it gets too strong. Hours, maybe even days,

went by as we hid waiting for attacks and looting

to end. At times, when the door opened, a waft of wind

made its way to those unfolding leaves

waving like the curtains out of blown out windows.

"
"







San José, Costa Rica







Tortillas clap against floured palms,

steaming bowls of avena, frijoles

black as the rumbling sky,arroz con pollo simmers. Against the kitchen

 

window, small clouds rise. Papá dances

to the electric beat of the marimba,

his cheek bristly against Mamá’s

neck; his thick fingers sift

 

through her wispy hair. I am nowhere

to be found, neither in the foreground nor

background. Today I sit in this chair,

in the corner of my house, covered

with a poncho of blue flowers,

looking out at asphalt roads overflowing

with rain, fogging the glass. Along the road,

steam rises like blotchy fingerprints.

"
"

As a kid the only black woman

in my life was my fourth-grade teacher—

I remember her not because she was black

but mostly because of her copper-colored

bob that never changed, as if a piece

of bronze had been chiseled onto her

head and neither I nor my classmates

could prove it was a wig, but we knew it was

too perfect to be real. Then you came in-

­to my home—but not the way someone

came in one afternoon while we were away

grocery shopping, leaving the side door wide

open releasing my white-winged parakeet,

my mother’s jewelry and our television,

gone. And for years I watched you go

from analog into digital; you were

the modicum of motherhood I encountered

daily while my mother stood on a production

line mouthing prayers for prosperity

and health in a room of air

compressors. You’re a super galactic

hologram—scattered light reconstructed

through the dark matter, ever-shrinking

pixels—shifting the cosmology

of the world with gigs of Gayle, and

revolutionary road trips. And now

will you quietly fade out into the space-

time continuum where not even my imagination

will find you? Your last broadcast

like the final song of our beloved parakeet

as it flew past the leafless trees toward

the vast dome of heaven.

"
"







For James Welch







The first harvest of wheat in flatlands

along the Milk startled me into thoughts of you

and this place we both remember and also forget as home.

Maybe it was the familiarity or maybe it was my own

need to ask if you have ever regretted leaving.

What bends, what gives?

And have you ever missed this wind?—it has now

grown warm with late summer, but soon

it will be as dangerous as the bobcat stalking calves

and pets just south of the river.

Men take out their dogs, a case of beer and wait

in their pickups for dawn, for a chance with their rifles.

They don’t understand that she isn’t going to make

any mistakes. With winter my need for an answer

grows more desperate and there are only four roads out.  

One is the same cat hunters drive with mannish glory

and return along, gun still oil-shined and unshot.

Another goes deeper into Assiniboine territory:

This is the one I should talk myself into taking next.

I haven’t much traveled the third except to visit

a hospital where, after the first time,

my mother had refused chemotherapy.

And the last road you know as well as I do—

past the coral-painted Catholic church, its doors

long ago sealed shut to the mouth of Mission Canyon,

then south just a ways, to where the Rockies cut open 

and forgive. There you and I are on the ascent.

After that, the arrival is what matters most. 

"
"

Some lamp sputters

its dusty light

across some desk.

Some hand, shaking,

works the strained

rope, twisting and knifing,

weaving, tugging tight

a bellowing circle. Randy

Travis, steamy drawl

and hiccup on the staticky

AM, backs the ritual

of drooping loop.

Sweat drips an awful

hallelujah. God glares

askance, but the artist

doesn’t waver—wrists

click cadence, knots

become a path to what

makes saviors. The sagging

hoop bemoans a need

to squeeze, its craving

for a breath within the ring.

"
"

Dumbfounded in hospital whites, you are picture-book

itty-bit, floundering in bleach and steel. Braids untwirl

and corkscrew, you squirm, the crater in your shoulder

spews a soft voltage. On a TV screwed into the wall

above your head, neon rollicks. A wide-eyed train

engine perfectly smokes, warbles a song about forward.

 

Who shot you, baby?I don’t know. I was playing.

You didn’t see anyone?I was playing with my friend Sharon.I was on the swingand she was—

Are you sure you didn’t—No, I ain’t seen nobody but Sharon. I heardpeople yelling though, and—

 

Each bullet repainted you against the brick, kicked

you a little sideways, made you need air differently.

You leaked something that still goldens the boulevard.I ain’t seen nobody, I told you.

And at A. Lincoln Elementary on Washington Street,

or Jefferson Elementary on Madison Street, or Adams

Elementary just off the Eisenhower Expressway,

we gather the ingredients, if not the desire, for pathos:

 

an imploded homeroom, your empty seat pulsating

with drooped celebrity, the sometime counselor

underpaid and elsewhere, a harried teacher struggling

toward your full name. Anyway your grades weren’t

all that good. No need to coo or encircle anything,

no call for anyone to pull their official white fingers

through your raveled hair, no reason to introduce

the wild notion of loving you loud and regardless.

 

Oh, and they’ve finally located your mama, who

will soon burst in with her cut-rate cure of stammering

Jesus’ name. Beneath the bandages, your chest crawls

shut. Perky ol’ Thomas winks a bold-faced lie from

his clacking track, and your heart monitor hums

a wry tune no one will admit they’ve already heard.

 

Elsewhere, 23 seconds rumble again and again through

Sharon’s body. Boom, boom, she says to no one.

"
"

When black, men drown. They spend their whole lifetimes

justifying the gall of springing the trap, the inconvenience

of slouched denim, of coupling beyond romance or aim.

All the while, the rising murk edges toward their chins.

Hurriedly, someone crafts another scientific tome, a giddy

exploration of the curious dysfunction identifying black

men first as possible, then as necessary. Elegant equations

succumb to a river that blurs quotient and theory, rendering

them unreadable, and the overwhelm easily disappears

the men, their wiry heads glistening, then gulped. All that’s

left is the fathers’ last wisdom, soaked wreckage on silver:Girl, that water ain’t nothing but wet. I’m gon’ be alright.

 

When black men drown, their daughters turn to their mothers

and ask What should I do with this misnamed shiver in myleft shoulder? How should I dress in public? They are weary

of standing at the shore, hands shading their eyes, trying

to make out their own fathers among the thousands bobbing

in the current. The mothers mumble and point to any flailing

that seems familiar. Mostly, they’re wrong. Buoyed by church

moans and comfort food of meat and cream, the daughters

try on other names that sound oddly broken when pressed

against the dank syllables of the fathers’. Drained, with justforward in mind, they walk using the hip of only one parent.

They scratch in their sleep. Black water wells up in the wound.

 

When black men drown, their daughters are fascinated with

the politics of water, how gorgeously a surface breaks

to receive, how it weeps so sanely shut. And the thrashing

of hands, shrieking of names: I was Otis, I was Willie Earl,they called me Catfish. Obsessed by the waltzing of tides,

the daughters remember their fathers—the scorch of beard

electrifying the once-in-a-while kiss, the welts in thick arms,

eyes wearied with so many of the same days wedged behind

them. When black men drown, their daughters memorize all

the steps involved in the deluge. They know how long it takes

for a weakened man to dissolve. A muted light, in the shape

of a little girl, used to be enough to light a daddy’s way home.

 

When black men drown, their daughters drag the water’s floor

with rotting nets, pull in whatever still breathes. They insist their

still-dripping daddies sit down for cups of insanely sweetened

tea, sniffs of rotgut, tangled dinners based on improbable swine.

The girls hope to reacquaint their drowned fathers with the concept

of body, but outlines slosh in drift and retreat. The men can’t get

dry. Parched, they scrub flooded hollows and weep for water

to give them name and measure as mere blood once did. Knocking

over those spindly-legged dinette chairs, they interrupt the failed

feast and mutter Baby girl, gotta go, baby gotta go, their eyes

misted with their own murders. Grabbing their girls, they spit

out love in reverse and stumble toward the banks of some river.

 

When black men drown their daughters, the rash act is the only

plausible response to the brain’s tenacious mouth and its dare: Yes, yes, open your ashed hands and release that wingless child. Note

the arc of the sun-drenched nosedive, the first syllable of the child’s

name unwilling from the man’s mouth, the melody of billow that

begins as blessed clutch. Someone crouching inside the father waits

impatiently for the shutting, the lethargic envelop, and wonders if

the daughter’s wide and realizing eye will ever close to loose him.

It never will, and the man and his child and the daughter and her

father gaze calmly into the wrecked science of each other’s lives.

The sun struggles to spit a perfect gold upon the quieting splash.

The river pulses stylish circles of its filth around the swallow.

 

 

"
"

It seems insane now, but

she’d be standing soaked

in schoolday morning light,

her loose-leaf notebook,

flickering at the bus stop,

and we almost trembled

 

at the thought of her mouth

filled for a moment with both

of our short names. I don’t know

what we saw when we saw

her face, but at fifteen there’s

so much left to believe in,

 

that a girl with sunset

in her eyes, with a kind smile,

and a bright blue miniskirt softly

shading her bare thighs     really

could be The Goddess. Even

the gloss on her lips sighedKiss me    and you’ll never

 do homework again. Some Saturdays

my ace, Terry, would say, “Guess

who was buying Teaberry gum

in the drugstore on Stenton?”

And I could see the sweet

epiphany still stunning his eyes

 

and I knew that he knew

that I knew he knew     I knew—

especially once summer had come,

and the sun stayed up till we had

nothing else to do but wish

and wonder about fine sistas

 

in flimsy culottes and those hotpants! 

James Brown screamed about: Crystal

Berry, Diane Ramsey, Kim Graves,

and her. This was around 1970: Vietnam

to the left of us, Black Muslims

to the right, big afros all over my

 

Philadelphia. We had no idea

where we were, how much history

had come before us—how much

cruelty, how much more dying

was on the way. For me and Terry,

it was a time when everything said

 maybe, and maybe being blinded

by the beauty of a tenth grader

was proof that, for a little while,

we were safe from the teeth

that keep chewing up the world.

I’d like to commend

 

my parents    for keeping calm,

for not quitting their jobs or grabbing

guns    and for never letting up

about the amazing “so many doors

open to good students.” I wish

 

I had kissed

Delores Jepps. I wish I could

have some small memory of her

warm and spicy mouth to wrap

these hungry words around. I

 

would like to have danced with her,

to have slow-cooked to a slow song

in her sleek, toffee arms: her body

balanced between the Temptations’ 

five voices and me—a boy anointed

 

with puberty, a kid with a B

average and a cool best friend.

I don’t think I’ve ever understood

how lonely I am, but I was

 

closer to it at fifteen because

I didn’t know anything: my heart

so near the surface of my skin

 

I could have moved it with my hand.

"
"

It’s true: I almost never

smile, but that doesn’t mean

 

I’m not    in love: my heart

is that black violin

played slowly. You know that

 

moment late in the solo

when the voice

is so pure    you feel

the blood in it: the wound

 

between rage

and complete surrender. That’s

where I’m smiling. You just

can’t see it—the sound

 

bleeding perfectly

inside me. The first time

I killed a vampire    I was

 

sad: I mean

we were almost

family.

 

But that’s

so many lives

ago. I believe

 

in the cry that cuts

into the melody, the strings

calling back the forgotten world.

 

When I think of the madness

that has made me    and the midnight

I walk inside—all day long:

 

when I think of that

one note    that breaks

what’s left of what’s

human in me, man,

 

I love    everything

"
"

I remember that first time:

the empty auditorium, her voice,

the dark all around us,

her mouth reaching into mine.

She was Freddy’s foxy older sister,

and I didn’t know why

she wanted to kiss me. She

had already finished high school

and probably shouldn’t have

been walking the halls, but

she always called me her friend.

So one Monday after gym,

 

I found myself beside myself

in front of her house—with my

trench coat and lunch bag—

probably not looking much

like Shaft. Inside, the air held

warm milk and we talked a bit

about her baby    and her Aunt

who paid the rent painting cars.

 

Maybe she liked me because

we were both black and mostly

alone in the suburbs, but I hadn’t

thought about that. It was her voice

that got me—banked fire, the color

of dusk—her voice, and my name

was smoke in her mouth.

 

I think about it more than I should now,

that January noon—an hour before

algebra—how most days I’d be

thinking football    or replaying

the seventy-some kisses I’d gotten

over those lean years, but that day

 

Donna and me were on the couch

munching potato chips. Rrruffles have rrridges, she kidded coming

from checking the baby who’d

slipped into a nap. I was kind of

disappointed that we hadn’t

done anything, but I needed time

to get back to school, so I started

to stand. She said wait, look at this mess,

 

and with her left hand, she

brushed the crumbs from my lap

the way you’d whisk away lint—

then, swept over my pants again—

to be thorough, I guessed, but slower

and then some more, as if her hand

 

were getting    drowsy. You know

how sometimes you see something

but just can’t believe it—like a squirrel

bobbling a biscuit on your kitchen counter

or a cricket creeping the red feathers

of your mother’s Sunday hat?

 

Her hand there, on my lap,

could easily have been a five-fingered

flying saucer from the fifth dimension.

For awhile, I just watched and

wondered if she knew where

her hand had landed    but it was me

who didn’t know: me with my

six dozen kisses and the great Eden

of my virginity. How

do we not talk about it

 

every day: the ways

we were changed

by the gift

in someone’s touch—your body,

suddenly a bright instrument

played by an otherwise

silent divinity.

 

When I heard my zipper, I couldn’t

have said where my arms

were    or what a clock was for:

I had

no idea    I could be such a stranger

and still be myself. How could I

have known what a girl

 

might do to a boy

with her mouth     if she felt

like doing what her mouth

could do? It was

a kind of miracle: the dreamedimpossible—my soul finally called

to my flesh. I didn’t know

what I didn’t know    and then I knew.

"
"

I used to think

that if I loved hard

enough and long enough

passion would always win out

 

like the way I loved

cologne, venturing teenaged into

congested malls, abusing testers

only a salesperson surly enough

 

inquiring if he or she could help

me in any way, spitting

the prices of even the smallest

bottles of the scents I had

 

slathered on, forcing me out

in a cloud of confidence

that I was the Calvin Klein

Man, not the Old Spice

 

Man, not the Zest

Man, and certainly not

the My Drafty House Is Warmed Badly

by Kerosene Heaters Man

 

impervious to my real

life where I would sneak

down in the middle

of the night, passing

 

snow collecting

on the inside of the window

sill, trying to descend

the stairs silently

 

to complete the night lying

before the stove’s vents blowing

sooty warm air deep into my

sleeping lungs, clutching

 

a broken lacrosse stick

to intimidate rats so brazen

our housecats accepted

them as equal occupants

 

until I exit those automatic

doors, leave fountains where

just out of range I envy white

families tossing entire

 

cigarette packs’ worth

of what they call spare

change, wishing for things

they could already buy if they wanted

 

laughing as those presidential

faces fall sometimes up

and sometimes down, all drowning

in three inches of chlorinated well water

 

return to the reservation

where my sister-

in-law embraces me later

the same day, drawing

 

deeply, saying she loves

the scent of burned heating

oil on men, that it reminds

her of when she and my brother

 

dated and she would hold

him long in those last moments

before allowing him to walk out

her door, meander through snowy

 

grooves, finding his way home

while she looked out windows

where ice crystals gathered

on the proper side of the pane

 

holding her breath as long as she

dared, letting his presence seep

out only when she could no longer

bear, leaving him to be a vapor ghost

 

on her window, a fog sure

to vanish even before she turned

from the window and here I am

years later living in that same

 

state, you miles away and I,

knowing how presence disperses

into air, wonder how long

I can hold my breath.

"
"

The unsympathetic wind, how she has evaded me for years now,

leaving a guileless shell and no way to navigate. Once when I stood

on a plateau of earth just at the moment before the dangerous,

jutting peaks converged upon the lilting sway of grasslands, I almost

found a way back. There, the sky, quite possibly all the elements,

caused the rock and soil and vegetation to congregate. Their prayer

was not new and so faint I could hardly discern. Simple remembrances,

like a tiny, syncopated chorus calling everyone home: across

a thousand eastward miles, and what little wind was left at my back.

But I could not move. And then the music was gone.

All that was left were the spring time faces of mountains, gazing down,

their last patches of snow, luminous. I dreamed of becoming snow melt,

gliding down the slope and in to the valley. With the promise,

an assurance, that there is always a way to become bird, tree, water again.

"
"

Some lunatic with a gun killed some people at an

immigration center in Binghamton, New York. Liz

Rosenberg and her family live up there and David, her

husband, teaches in the middle school which is close to

all the action (the way, in any smallish town, everything is

close to all the action). I called Liz to see if everyone was

all right and she was in her car driving to the elementary

school to pick up Lily, her young daughter she brought

back from China a few years ago. Lily was fine, but

Liz wanted to move her outside the question of how to

make sense of the broken pieces of “someone” with a

gun walking into a public space and then firing. There’s

something called (I learned from a news report the day of

the shootings at Virginia Tech) The Talking Day which

refers to the day immediately following the day when

something wildly violent happens. No one quite grasps

the reality of the situation and everyone spends that first day

talking about what happened and reliving it as language—

not so much to understand the violence but to make a

kind of recording of it: talking about it, letting go of it,

putting it down. And so I imagine it must be with Liz and

Lily and David in Binghamton, New York today: letting

“something” go. Liz is in her car after having just picked up

Lily at school and driving back home through a town that

suddenly makes no sense and she is telling the story about

what happened when a young man walked into a building

with a gun. And for Lily, who’s had a pretty serene, un-

violent United States time so far and whose endless joy

has made her an adorable chatterbox, tomorrow could be

her first talking day. Or, if not tomorrow, some other day.

We live in a talking day world.

"
"

The radio clicks on—it’s poor swollen America,

Up already and busy selling the exhausting obligation

Of happiness while intermittently debating whether or not

A man who kills fifty people in five minutes

With an automatic weapon he has bought for the purpose

Is mentally ill. Or a terrorist. Or if terrorists

Are mentally ill. Because if killing large numbers of people

With sophisticated weapons is a sign of sickness—

You might want to begin with fire, our early ancestors

Drawn to the warmth of it—from lightning,

Must have been, the great booming flashes of it

From the sky, the tree shriveled and sizzling,

Must have been, an awful power, the odor

Of ozone a god’s breath; or grass fires,

The wind whipping them, the animals stampeding,

Furious, driving hard on their haunches from the terror

Of it, so that to fashion some campfire of burning wood,

Old logs, must have felt like feeding on the crumbs

Of the god’s power and they would tell the story

Of Prometheus the thief, and the eagle that feasted

On his liver, told it around a campfire, must have been,

And then—centuries, millennia—some tribe

Of meticulous gatherers, some medicine woman,

Or craftsman of metal discovered some sands that,

Tossed into the fire, burned blue or flared green,

So simple the children could do it, must have been,

Or some soft stone rubbed to a powder that tossed

Into the fire gave off a white phosphorescent glow.

The word for chemistry from a Greek—some say Arabic—

Stem associated with metal work. But it was in China

Two thousand years ago that fireworks were invented—

Fire and mineral in a confined space to produce power—

They knew already about the power of fire and water

And the power of steam: 100 BC, Julius Caesar’s day.

In Alexandria, a Greek mathematician produced

A steam-powered turbine engine. Contain, explode.

“The earliest depiction of a gunpowder weapon

Is the illustration of a fire-lance on a mid-12th-century

Silk banner from Dunhuang.” Silk and the silk road.

First Arab guns in the early fourteenth century. The English

Used cannons and a siege gun at Calais in 1346.

Cerigna, 1503: the first battle won by the power of rifles

When Spanish “arquebusiers” cut down Swiss pikemen

And French cavalry in a battle in southern Italy.

(Explosions of blood and smoke, lead balls tearing open

The flesh of horses and young men, peasants mostly,

Farm boys recruited to the armies of their feudal overlords.)

How did guns come to North America? 2014,

A headline: DIVERS DISCOVER THE SANTA MARIA

One of the ship’s Lombard cannons may have been stolen

By salvage pirates off the Haitian reef where it had sunk.

And Cortes took Mexico with 600 men, 17 horses, 12 cannons.

And LaSalle, 1679, constructed a seven-cannon barque,

Le Griffon, and fired his cannons upon first entering the

     continent’s

Interior. The sky darkened by the terror of the birds.

In the dream time, they are still rising, swarming,

Darkening the sky, the chorus of their cries sharpening

As the echo of that first astounding explosion shimmers

On the waters, the crew blinking at the wind of their wings.

Springfield Arsenal, 1777. Rock Island Arsenal, 1862.

The original Henry rifle: a sixteen shot .44 caliber rimfire

Lever-action, breech-loading rifle patented—it was an age

Of tinkerers—by one Benjamin Tyler Henry in 1860,

Just in time for the Civil War. Confederate casualties

In battle: about 95,000. Union casualties in battle:

About 110,000. Contain, explode. They were throwing

Sand into the fire, a blue flare, an incandescent green.

The Maxim machine gun, 1914, 400-600 small caliber rounds

Per minute. The deaths in combat, all sides, 1914-1918

Was 8,042,189. Someone was counting. Must have been.

They could send things whistling into the air by boiling water.

The children around the fire must have shrieked with delight

1920: Iraq, the peoples of that place were “restive,”

Under British rule and the young Winston Churchill

Invented the new policy of “aerial policing,” which amounted,

Sources say, to bombing civilians and then pacifying them

With ground troops. Which led to the tactic of terrorizing

     civilian

Populations in World War II. Total casualties in that war,

Worldwide: soldiers, 21 million; civilians, 27 million.

They were throwing sand into the fire. The ancestor who stole

Lightning from the sky had his guts eaten by an eagle.

Spread-eagled on a rock, the great bird feasting.

They are wondering if he is a terrorist or mentally ill.

London, Dresden. Berlin. Hiroshima, Nagasaki.

The casualties difficult to estimate. Hiroshima:

66,000 dead, 70,000 injured. In a minute. Nagasaki:

39,000 dead, 25,000 injured. There were more people killed,

100,000, in more terrifying fashion in the firebombing

Of Tokyo. Two arms races after the ashes settled.

The other industrial countries couldn’t get there

Fast enough. Contain, burn. One scramble was

For the rocket that delivers the explosion that burns humans

By the tens of thousands and poisons the earth in the process.

They were wondering if the terrorist was crazy. If he was

A terrorist, maybe he was just unhappy. The other

Challenge afterwards was how to construct machine guns

A man or a boy could carry: lightweight, compact, easy to

     assemble.

First a Russian sergeant, a Kalashnikov, clever with guns

Built one on a German model. Now the heavy machine gun.

The weapon of European imperialism through which

A few men trained in gunnery could slaughter native armies

In Africa and India and the mountains of Afghanistan,

Became “a portable weapon a child can operate.”

The equalizer. So the undergunned Vietnamese insurgents

Fought off the greatest army in the world. So the Afghans

Fought off the Soviet army using Kalashnikovs the CIA

Provided to them. They were throwing powders in the fire

And dancing. Children’s armies in Africa toting AK-47s

That fire thirty rounds a minute. A round is a bullet.

An estimated 500 million firearms on the earth.

100 million of them are Kalashnikov-style semi-automatics.

They were dancing in Orlando, in a club. Spring night.

Gay Pride. The relation of the total casualties to the history

Of the weapon that sent exploded metal into their bodies—

30 rounds a minute, or 40, is a beautifully made instrument,

And in America you can buy it anywhere—and into the history

Of the shaming culture that produced the idea of Gay Pride—

They were mostly young men, they were dancing in a club,

A spring night. The radio clicks on. Green fire. Blue fire.

The immense flocks of terrified birds still rising

In wave after wave above the waters in the dream time.

Crying out sharply. As the French ship breasted the vast

     interior

Of the new land. America. A radio clicks on. The Arabs,

A commentator is saying, require a heavy hand. Dancing.

"
"

who by the time it arrived

had made its plan heretofore

stonewall   it had not a penny

thats not true it had several pennies

 

can you make a sovereign nation a national park how condescending

instead just tell them to honor the treaty

 

what can poetry do it

cant not not do nothing

it must undulate w/ the 2:30 pm dance music the sole

patrons at stonewall

 

there was a shooting in ohio today

the music made me feel a little anxious it was

hard thumping dance music a notch

upwards of 100 bpm notoriously the beat of life

the optimum tempo for cpr

I consider downloading a metronome real quick to test it to tap it out but

I don’t want to be ‘anywhere near’ my phone

meaning it’s in my bag on the stool 2 feet from me

 

there is an amy winehouse video on no sound at least

I think it is amy winehouse

she is at a funeral black and white

there is a stuffed bird slightly obscuring my view of the tv

it looks like a kind of tall pigeon w/ mottled brown

and russet with a white ringlet necklace and black dots

is it a carrier pigeon I wonder I sent

a text to jocelyn at standing rock several texts

 

are you still on the road

ariana and i r gonna go out there in december

sending love to you

tried calling bt yr mailbox is full

send a sign when u can xoxo

howdy.  thinking of u w love.

hope all is well.  send smoke

signal telegram carrier pigeon 

send love to my twospirits at the

winyan camp.

 

last night we prayed for her and for zephyr and l. frank &

the twospirits especially at standing rock

there’s no sign of that struggle here but they are selling tshirts

     commemorating

the other and the six days of riots

led by transwomen of color they later tried to whitewash in that

     terrible movie

like it was all these hot angry upright downright forthright white gays

      so ready

for the revolution 

and now people are treating standing rock like burning man

 

a drink called goslings

videos by the pigeon misaligned with the music

the smell of booze in the air made both of us recoil slightly I saw

or felt it

 

I’m here to make a poem I was already paid for when I had less than $2 in

my bank account (and I joked I would go right to the bar and buy every-

body drinks ) not even enough for a subway ride and I used the 58 cents I’d

gotten for busking for the first time alone in the long hallway between the

library at bryant park and the orange line trains by the ovid quote ‘gutta

cavat lapidem’ water (or a drop of water really) hollows out

a stone.   lapidum a stone or rock ariana once described cd wright’s style

     as ‘lapidary’

I loved this as a description of writing like the hieroglyphics are

literally lapidary and I told my grandmother about it as we

were driving from mescalero to albuquerque she knew all about the

plants and the names for all the rockforms mesas or buttes or

ziggurats and I said how do

you know all these she said by long observation and

I used to study geology in college I wanted to major in it

but they wouldn’t allow women

to major in the hard sciences then so she

began to study religion

tho she already had medicine

 

ricky martin on the beach

or is it someone younger sexier

the grand canyon splitting apart

is it an ad is it a video

even the sands at the beach

are bouncing with the beat

the tempo has stayed very similar this whole time a tick

up I suspect from 100bpm

"
"

Lord, it’s not true

That my faith is cooling.

It’s just that people

Are saying that candle smoke

Has caused cancer in church mice.

And I also worry that candle light

Is too weak to reach your cloud.

 

Do I need a hydrogen candle?

Are the Angels into lasers?

 

Lord, as I think about it,

Lately I haven’t had much to thank you for.

 

Are you on vacation?

"
"

Alan drives a cab at night,

Has cab driver’s elbow

In his left arm,

Sells real estate by day.

 

Alan dreams of a big deal,

Of opening a classy poolhall.

Has a four million dollar deal

Which will probably fall through,

Has a big land deal with the Post Office

But it will take 20 years to deliver

Because they are so slow.

 

Alan collects baseball cards and comic books

Hates condos and townhouses

Though he lives in one.

Was a trader for nineteen and one-half years

Then fired when the market melted.

 

Alan, even if he was rich,

Would not let his stepdaughter

By his second wife

Have her own phone and private line

Like her rich friend Rebecca has

Because after all she is only twelve.

 

Alan, half Jewish, has three tattoos.

“I got them recently because I wanted them.

My Jewish aunt nearly had a stroke

When she saw them.”

 

Alan admits he is a pack rat saving

Everything, loves wood, restoration, and antiques.

Alan admires the people who buy old houses

And fix them up.

Hates the development of Staten Island

Blaming it on the people from Brooklyn.

 

Alan was cooking sausages and onions

(His other half is Italian)

In his back yard

When a woman knocked his parked car

Into the next block,

Totaled it; he got $1,200 more

Than it was worth.

 

Alan found a turtle and put

It in a safe stream,

Stopped a dog from killing a cock

In historic Richmondtown.

 

Alan hates the dump—

ninety-four percent of the garbage there

Is dropped by the other boroughs—

Likes the idea of secession,

Staten Island free and independent.

 

Alan apologetically asks

If he didn’t talk too much

As he brings me to my destination.

 

He leaves me a great silence

And I wish I had one million American bucks

To tip the exuberant Alan.

 

Alan, take this million bucks

Strip the paint off the good wood of your dreams

And tattoo the tedious days.

"
"

First:       Brother, remove the tool marks on your scathed skin, brush your tattoos with

                                   nettles, smear bearberry juice in the gashes. Crack open the jail-seed.

 

Second:   Tear away the bars which restrain

                                   your lean, spare life. Bend your curves in a knot. Brother, smudge your

                                   saw-tooth edges.

 

Third:      Cut red seaweed to conceal your gray cadaver;

                                   start wetting your skin down; after scraping,

                                   drip your bowels of blood, change into wolf.

 

Fourth:    The savannah sparrow flies north.

                                   In speech, smell fine-grained hawthorn.

                                   Collapse your voice into bark and howl.

 

"
"

She and I make a bladder bag to draw water from the ice trench.

She/I chain stitch/es a skin dressed in oil to make a new pot of soup.

She/I sew/s a badger hair rough around the top of her/my kamiks

to make the steps windward, toward the limits of woman.

She/I eat/s club root and white clover to strengthen her/my silver

body to bear a child. She/I map/s, following 1 degree from the North

Star and 60 degrees from the end of the earth’s axis on rotation

for Ukpeagvik she/I use/s a small arc of ice, cleaving into parts, reduced

to simple curves fitted with serrated edges of white flesh. She/I mold/s

to the fretted neck of frozen water into a deep urn, made like a rock shelter

or a cavern. She/I construct/s a hole on the surface of a glacier formed by melting particles

of roe and pan reservoir dust from a shelter for the ice worms. Because the earth is

molding, burning, laughing, and purging its crust.

"
"

Why is it, in Bristol Bay, a sea cormorant

hovers, sings a two-fold song with a hinged cover

 

for a mouth, teeth set in sockets, with a hissing grind

of spikelets biting the air? Dip one.

 

The lips of vanished flames in lava coals

glow vermillion as an egg cracks. Dip two.

 

She/I feel/s a chimera leaving the eider duck. Dip three.

While still in the embryo, separating the body

 

from death she/I smell/s of arsenic, the Chugach Range

in unnatural bitterness. Why is it, man’s/woman’s nerve scarcely

 

stifled and sane, comes to prey? While they swoon

minerals of crude oil and sea spiders for tricking a way for gold.

 

Will they crawl around her/me, sink their eyeteeth in the sea,

ravaging the ecosphere and the ore gold for fuel. Drill.

"
"

Thinking to see them there, captains

industrious in

morning sun, I crack the egg’s tender

yellow head

 

Love comes to me un-

­repentant, toward it all vectors

converge repeating, like

 

moment of the necessary form

I pluck a feather from your neck

 

On the page one alights without permission, or

love is

an assemblage

 

beginning each day identical, palpable I

remarks of, is it that music or need edits

my body

 

two people leave a shopping mall

with goods, death squad hovering high

a streetlamp

Call your mother, stay up late

 

to watch the neighborhood

undressing light, like

multiple phone calls

connected then

hung up, get the family together soon, watch

 

American bison overtake the field

filling a vehicle lane in early snow

obstructed I paused

To see it, their dark furs shaking enormous

out of trees they descended from the line of sky

respond to a much deeper instinct

 

we were then back on our way

input later to the search bar

I love keywords, like

love is

an exodus

 

I imagine you sleeping, then a pyramid or

chandelier throwing sunlight

 

An absence emerges, sharp

I regard the whole

practice of it

 

touch it

"
"

Moved all the way here to watch

television alone, swallowed by the grim

 

news grinning. Fuck a five year plan, first

one passes through Tiananmen the gate

 

of heavenly peace, emptied public square finery

in summer, purple cupping red azaleas

 

Happy birth upon a time, Nation!

Reveling in my love for him coquettish

 

worried, approaching paranoia

for the home country removed that June

 

The cropped photo best dilated

in our pockets black and white

 

It was a long hard road continuously reading

analysis metrics, my father knew a guy

 

worked in sales, was there and saw

them roll in like nothing else

 

Black pillars to the effective dispersal

 

I felt nothing pulling

from the airport’s narrowing gate

In the photo we still get perfectly centered

 

Longview the idiot’s

consumption guide, naturally then

 

my love for was only

 

"
"

Such were they, a dumb stuffed thing

to say, if truth is we all grow old un-

 

observed, limbs flail only halfway up

a flight, where does dark begin settling

 

my little bones. I dream and do love

to have them, blue fish

 

in a lake, my head more tipped up than down

under damp earth. Some days others like deer

 

from the shot, peeled back, how I

find trees dressed in wild

 

green light. The years come, unstitched

a face, saddled as one would a heavy beast

 

for walking. Likely I became then a member

of heaven, put up, the years come and reaching

 

their long wet hands.

"
"

The age of portrait is drugged. Beauty

is symmetry so rare it’s a mystery.

My left eye is smaller than my right,

my big mouth shows my nice teeth perfectly

aligned like Muslims in prayer.

My lips an accordion. Each sneeze

a facial thumbprint. One corner

of my mouth hangs downward when I want

to hold a guffaw hostage. Bell’s palsy perhaps

or what Mark Twain said about steamboat piloting,

that a doctor’s unable to look upon the blush

in a young beauty’s face without thinking

it could be a fever, a malar rash,

a butterfly announcing a wolf. Can I lie

facedown now as cadavers posed

on first anatomy lesson? I didn’t know mine

was a woman until three weeks later

we turned her over. Out of reverence

there was to be no untimely exposure of donors,

our patrons who were covered in patches

of scrubs-green dish towels,

and by semester’s end we were sick of all that,

tossed mega livers and mammoth hearts

into lab air and caught them. My body

was Margaret. That’s what the death certificate said

when it was released before finals. The cause

of her death? Nothing memorable,

frail old age. But the colonel on table nineteen

with an accessory spleen had put a bullet through

his temple, a final prayer. Not in entry or exit

were there skull cracks to condemn the house

of death, no shattered glass in the brain,

only a smooth tunnel of deep violet that bloomed

in concentric circles. The weekends were lonely.

He had the most beautiful muscles

of all 32 bodies that were neatly arranged,

zipped up as if a mass grave had been disinterred.

Or when unzipped and facing the ceiling

had cloth over their eyes as if they’d just been executed.

Gray silver hair, chiseled countenance,

he was sixty-seven, a veteran of more than one war.

I had come across that which will end me, ex­-

tend me, at least once, without knowing it.

"
"

The sudden pink shape

surfacing in black-water lagoons

shocked explorers.

All dolphins share man’s

thumb and fingerbones,

but these also wear his flesh.

When the river overflows

and floods the varzea, 

these dolphins travel miles

to splash in the shallows

amongst buttress-roots of giant

rainforest trees.

The waters abate, trapping fish,

dolphins never.

 

A lamp burning dolphin oil

blinds. At night

the pink-flesh contours melt and blur.

The flipper extends the hidden hand

to lift its woman’s torso

to the land. An Eve,

born each night from the black Amazon,

roams the dark banks for victims

to draw to the water and death.

Taboo to the Indians,

this pink daughter of the river’s magic

always looks, to explorers,

like she’s smiling.

 

"
"

We set up an assembly line.

I heat the tortillas in manteca 

after Crystal dips them in chile ancho 

and drains them. Niles carries full plates

of hot tortillas to his father,

who rolls them around spoonfuls of filling.

When we’ve finished the hot, greasy work,

I pour the last of the sauce over neat rows

of stuffed tortillas, sprinkle them with cheese,

clean the stove and counters.

The kids help their father rinse plates and pans.

They don’t know this is the last time.

The cheese melts. Crystal

dances to “No More Lonely Nights” on the radio.

Niles and his dad joke and wrestle.

After grace, we sit before steaming plates.

The kids stuff their mouths, insult each other,

and laugh. We can’t avoid their eyes

forever. Their father and I stare

at each other across the table.

"
"

A mother possum crawled down the chimney

the spring Donny came to us

because both sets of his parents had kicked him out,

the same April after your dad and I divorced

when you kicked a hole in the dining room wall.

The possum was swollen with young

she would later carry, half-grown, on her back

or hanging from her thick, hairless tail.

“An oversized rat with maternal instincts,”

your dad once said.

 

Instead of one angry son, I now had two–

fifteen and seventeen–

two forged signatures on absence excuses,

two discipline committee meetings,

two conferences with the principal.

While I worked,

you shared contraband beer,

as well as the basement bedroom

with its fieldstone fireplace

in which you found the possum one cool evening.

 

Laughing and cheering, you teamed up

to cage her with a trash can,

carry her to the alley out back and dump her.

The possum squeezed back

down the chimney twice more. The third time

you threw her out on Troost Avenue, screaming

for a car to smash her beneath its tires.

She must have been near her time,

desperate for a nest,

to crawl back down after that.

The noise woke me after midnight.

Donny had clubbed her with his nunchuks.

You both kicked and stomped

her head as she lurched, stumbled

between your feet.

Halfway down

the basement steps I stopped,

seeing your faces. The possum fell

limp. I backed slowly up the stairs.

 

In the morning, you couldn’t meet my eyes.

I just made you clean up the mess.

"
"

his eyelids like a moth’s fringed wings.

Arms flail against the Ninja Turtle sheet

and suddenly-long legs

race time.

 

Awake, he’s a water-leak detector, a recycling ranger

who bans Styrofoam and asks for beeswax

crayons, a renewable resource.

He wants to adopt the Missouri river,

write the president

to make factories stop polluting.

 

They’re old friends, he and George Bush.

He writes and scolds

the president, every month or so,

about the bombing the children of Iraq

(he made his own sign to carry in protest),

about the plight of the California condor and northern gray wolf,

about more shelters and aid for the homeless.

The lion-shaped bulletin board in his room

is covered with pictures and letters from George,

who must be nice,

even if he is a slow learner.

 

Joseph is a mystery fan, owns 54 Nancy Drews.

Nancy’s his friend, along with Jo, Meg, and Amy

and poor Beth, of course, whom he still mourns.

He also reads of knights and wizards, superheroes,

and how to win at Nintendo.

 

The cats and houseplants are his to feed and water

and the sunflower blooming in the driveway’s border

of weeds. He drew our backyard to scale,

using map symbols, sent off to have it declared

an official wildlife refuge, left a good-night

note on my pillow, written in Egyptian hieroglyphs.

 

In my life, I have done one good thing.

"
"

in my house. Days we’re ordinary,

affectionate, a close,

happy couple, but nights

require a passport and serious

immunizations, warnings about

security and guerilla attacks.

You are a foreign ruler,

quite possibly benevolent

in intention – but we know how

these things always play out,

don’t we? – with needs alien

to and hostile to your citizenry,

me, without power

except to say, “No more,”

and hope to survive

the fallout from the battles

in the streets. Days, we’re

the peaceful, devoted

pair all our friends envy.

Nights are always tense

around the DMZ that is our bed

with occasional forays into the bush

where the enemy is always lying

in wait. Sleep is hard, fearful

and troubled. I dream us

going down in flames.

"
"

Watts bleeds

leaving stained reminders

on dusty sidewalks.

 

Here where I strut alone

as glass lies broken by my feet

and a blanket of darkness is slung

across the wooden shacks

of nuetsra colonia.

 

Watts bleeds

dripping from carcasses of dreams:

Where despair

is old people

sitting on torn patio sofas

with empty eyes

and children running down alleys

with big sticks.

 

Watts bleeds

on vacant lots

and burned-out buildings–

temples desolated by a people’s rage.

 

Where fear is a deep river.

Where hate is an overgrown weed.

 

Watts bleeds

even as we laugh,

recall good times,

drink and welcome daylight

through the broken windshield

of an old Impala.

 

Here is the Watts of my youth,

where teachers threw me

from classroom to classroom,

not knowing where I could fit in.

 

Where I learned to fight or run,

where I zigzagged down alleys,

jumped over fences,

and raced by graffiti on crumbling

factory walls.

 

Where we played

between boxcars,

bleeding from

broken limbs and torn flesh,

and where years later

we shot up carga 

in the playground

of our childhood.

 

Watts bleeds

as the shadow of the damned

engulfs all the chinga of our lives.

 

In the warmth of a summer night,

gunshots echo their deadly song

through the silence of fear;

prelude to a heartbeat.

 

Watts bleeds

as I bled

getting laid-off from work,

standing by my baby’s crib,

touching his soft check

and fingering his small hand

as dreams shatter again,

dreams of fathers

for little men.

 

Watts bleeds

and the city hemorrhages,

unable to stop the flow

from this swollen and festering sore.

 

Oh bloom, you trampled flower!

Come alive as once

you tried to do from the ashes.

 

Watts, bleeding and angry,

you will be free.

"
"

All night vigil.

My two-and-a-half-year-old boy

and his 10-month-old sister

lay on the same bed,

facing opposite ends;

their feet touching.

They looked soft, peaceful,

bundled there in strands of blankets.

I brushed away roaches that meandered

across their faces,

but not even that could wake them.

Outside, the dark cover of night tore

as daybreak bloomed like a rose

on a stem of thorns.

I sat down on the backsteps,

gazing across the yellowed yard.

A 1954 Chevy Bel-Air stared back.

It was my favorite possession.

I hated it just then.

It didn’t start when I tried to get it going

earlier that night. It had a bad solenoid.

I held a 12-gauge shotgun across my lap.

I expected trouble from the Paragons gang

of the west Lynwood barrio.

Somebody said I dove the car

that dudes from Colonia Watts used

to shoot up the Paragons’ neighborhood.

But I got more than trouble that night.

My wife had left around 10 p.m.

to take a friend of mine home.

She didn’t come back.

I wanted to kill somebody.

At moments, it had nothing to do

with the Paragons.

It had to do with a woman I loved.

But who to kill? Not her–

sweet allure wrapped in a black skirt.

I’d kill myself first.

Kill me first?

But she was the one who quit!

Kill her? No, think man! I was hurt, angry. . .

but to kill her? To kill a Paragon?

To kill anybody?

I went into the house

and put the gun away.

 

Later that morning, my wife came for her things:

some clothes, the babies. . . their toys.

A radio, broken TV, and some dishes remained.

I didn’t stop her.

There was nothing to say that my face

didn’t explain already.

Nothing to do. . . but run.

 

So I drove the long haul to Downey

and parked near an enclosed area

alongside the Los Angeles River.

I got out of the car,

climbed over the fence

and stumbled down the slopes.

A small line of water rippled in the middle.

On rainy days this place flooded and flowed,

but most of the time it was dry

with dumped garbage and dismembered furniture.

Since a child, the river and its veins of canals

were places for me to think. Places to heal.

Once on the river’s bed, I began to cleanse.

I ran.

 

I ran into the mist of morning,

carrying the heat of emotion

through the sun’s rays;

I ran past the factories

that lay smack in the middle

of somebody’s backyard.

I ran past alleys with overturned trashcans

and mounds of tires.

Debris lay underfoot. Overgrown weeds

scraped my legs as I streamed past;

recalling the song of bullets

that whirred in the wind.

 

I ran across bridges, beneath overhead passes,

and then back alongside the infested walls

of the concrete river;

splashing rainwater as I threaded,

my heels colliding against the pavement.

So much energy propelled my legs

and, just like the river,

it went on for miles.

 

When all was gone,

the concrete river

was always there

and me, always running.

"
"

When Heavy tells a story

the millwright shanty under the electric furnaces

chokes with quiet, amid the roar,

as Heavy pauses, adjusts his mountainous weight

over a creaky grease-stained metal chair

and looks up at the whirling ceiling fan

next to fluorescent lights hanging by wires.

His fingers lace like so many sausages

across the canvas of blue workshirt

on his chest.

 

Heavy tells his story

and the voice of reason quickens the demise

of foulness from red-faced millwrights

just back from a repair job

and sitting around for the five air whistles

that again call them to combat on the furnace floor.

 

All laughter stops, all nonsense sayings

and cuts of wisdom cease their echo

when Heavy tells a story.

 

Heavy talks about the Mexican melter

who once had an affair with the Pit Boss’s wife.

The heart of the problem–and the fact

from which the story’s plot revolves–

was that the melter lived across the street

from the Pit Boss.

One night just before the graveyard shift,

the melter left his home, kissed his wife’s

round face and proceeded to walk to the bus stop.

But a bullet pierced through his hardhat

and he fell, like an overturned stack of fire bricks,

onto the pavement.

The moral of this story:

Never have an affair with someone

whose old man lives

within shooting distance.

 

Heavy tells a story

about a furnace foreman who always yelled

at the laborers for failing to clean

the bag house of the built-up filth

from hours of cooking scrap iron and ore.

The men told him it was too dangerous

to walk on the tin-roofed panels;

their weight could cause

them to fall some 30 feet

into the gaping mouth of a flaming furnace below.

“Nonsense,” the foreman yelled,

“you’re all just lazy Polacks.”

(he called everyone Polacks).

The foreman then proceeded to walk

across the roof as the men stood nearby,

with mouths open, near the safety of side beams.

“You see,” he said standing in the middle

as hydraulics moved shutters

up and down to capture the sulphur dust.

 

Then the foreman moved forward

and before anyone could shout,

he crashed through the roof,

screaming into a reddened pot of molten metal;

the oxygen in his body making popping sounds

as it entered. The furnace operates continued

to pour ladles of scrap iron and to melt the steel.

They skimmed the slag off the top

and when it was ready, they poured

the molten mass into ingot molds.

There was nothing they could do for the foreman,

they said. Production had to keep going.

 

Heavy looks into the eyes of his listeners and says:

Somewhere there’s a skyscraper in downtown LA

with steel beams made from the ingot

with the foreman’s body in it.

Somewhere there’s a bridge or underground pipe

with the man’s remains chemically bound

within the molecular structure.

 

Heavy tells a story. . .

 

and the men lay down their tools,

and coffee is poured into heavy ceramic cups,

the shanty stills beneath the rumbling,

and even foremen stop by

to pay a listen

when Heavy tells a story.

"
"

Continue to pour my thoughts out on this topic of discussion

Slow down, I keep gettin the feeling that I’m rushin

Like my cousin’s dying breaths, or the decision that was made

But lemme backtrack, letting feelings get in the way

A normal adolescent, aspiring for the highest

Goals that were attainable, wanted to be the flyest

We all searchin for something we’ve made a pact to do

The drive of ambition, it’s in us, it’s in you

Now snatch every dream that a mother had for her son

And replace that with a breath, “Baby, just take another one!”

A white man’s gun, the very courier of evil

He left, enjoyed his night, but the gunshots were lethal

Deceitful, everything we’ve been told from the start

We’ve more than just some ghetto thugs, these thoughts split us

    apart

What you must understand is our culture bore from oppression

The Hip Hop inside of us a form of expression

I wish I had the chance to explain to Jordan’s killer

That the song “Beef” by Lil Reese shouldn’t label him a dealer

Or is he ignorant or another ghetto thug?

Do you understand that your ignorance filled him with 3 slugs?

I don’t want sympathy and I don’t want affection

I want this country to head in the right direction

Instead of discussin who the Grammys should be awardin

Work to prevent murders like those of my cousin, Jordan.

 

"
"







after Miller Williams







This is to say we continued. As though continuing changed us.

As though continuing brought happiness as we had known.

 

On a dry field without cover, his skin blistered raw in the sun.

Not one among us came, as though he had no relations.

 

What did we say to our brother? How could we leave him alone

while soldiers guarded his corpse as though precious to them?

 

One of the women, in darkness, crept to the field where he died,

prayed for him, covered him up. Dust over what was not dust.

 

We would have ventured out with her if we had loved ourselves less.

We had to think of our children, and he was not coming back.

 

How could we live with the silence, live with our grief and our shame?

Death did not heal what he suffered. He was making demands.

 

We did not want him to be there, asking the question he asked us,

changing the sound of his name. He had embarrassed us.

 

This is the memory we carried, avoiding the thought that he remained

face down among the charred grasses, holding the earth with his hands.

"
"

I.

    The first question is always phrased this way:

    “So. How much Indian are you?”

 

II.

    We did not live in tepees.

    We did not braid our hair.

    We did not fringe our shirts.

    We did not wear war bonnets.

    We did not chase the buffalo.

    We did not carry shields.

    We were never Plains Indians.

    We tried to ride,

    but we kept falling off of our dogs.

 

III.

     A local official came to our office to ask our help with a city event. He had a splendid idea, he said. To kick off the event and show everyone in town that our tribe was still around, we should go up to the bluff overlooking the city and make a big smoke signal. Then they would know we were here.

     Who ever heard of smoke signals in the forests? I imagined us upon the bluff, lighting one of those firestarter bricks. We haven’t made fire since the Boy Scouts took over. And how would the citizens know it was us? They’d probably call the fire department.

 

IV.

     As they ask, they think, yes,     I can see it in her face. High cheekbones

    (whatever those are) and dark hair. 

 

    Here’s a thought: don’t we all have

    high cheekbones? If we didn’t,

    our faces would cave in.

   (But I do have a colonized nose.)

 

    I’m sick of explaining myself.

 

    “You know,” I finally say,

    “It doesn’t matter to my people.”

    I ride off to my ranch-style home.

    Time to weave a basket, or something.

 

"
"

When I learned I might have cancer,

I bought fifteen white lilies. Easter was gone:

the trumpets were wilted, plants crooked with roots

bound in pots. I dug them into the garden,

knowing they would not bloom for another year.

All summer, the stalks stood like ramshackle posts

while I waited for results. By autumn, the stalks

had flopped down. More biopsies, laser incisions,

the cancer in my tongue a sprawling mass. Outside,

the earth remained bare, rhizomes shrunken

below the frost line. Spring shoots appeared

in bright green skins, and lilies bloomed

in July, their waxed trumpets pure white,

dusting gold pollen to the ground.

                                                                     This year,

tripled in number, they are popping up again. I wait,

a ceremony, for the lilies to open, for the serpentine length

of the garden to bloom in the shape of my tongue’s scar,

a white path with one end leading into brilliant air,

the other down the throat’s canyon, black

and unforgiving. I try to imagine

what could grow in such darkness. I am waiting

for the lilies to open.

"
"

at the unemployment office

I know it can be a two hour deathly wait

before one’s name is called out

so I find a chair and bury my head

in a book that I brought to read

 

sitting beside me, a man and a woman converse

talk of years past, of people they knew

 

       and Leonard, is he still in prison? 

       yeah, he’s still doing time      well, that’s good, I guess, means he’s still alive

 

a young girl walks in, short black halter top

and airbrushed-on jeans

her breasts pouting up past a too-low neckline

the men, the women, all stare

whether they’d like to or not

 

Leonard’s friends exchange stories

       yeah, my ex, she just wants my money      I tell her, well, go work then! 

 

and they laugh between the ironylife, huh, she tells him, it’s crazy, the things we get into, 

he agrees

the rest of us caught silently in their exchange agree, as well

 

his arms are thick with hair

and tattoos of skills

and scrawled out

indecipherable letters of the alphabet

 

      yeah, this chick that was riding with me once, he tells her

    got her jacket belt caught on my wheel   I didn’t even know it until I got to the next light

   I went back, she was alright, just fell off, didn’t get hurt or nothing  she was pissed though. 

 

“just fell off, didn’t get hurt,” what does he mean?

this story just drops off, I want to know a little more, a lot more

I mean, how fast was the bike going when she fell off

did she ruin the belt, scrape her nose

did they drink a lot of beer afterwards?

 

and so the time drags by, the line lengthens

now and then people unbury their heads

from their midmorning dragging into noon thoughts

women adjust their bra straps

scold their kids with unfulfilled warnings

the folks behind the counter look at us

holding their half empty cups of coffee

 

ah, if only there was a dollar for every story

"
"

throughout the years I have designed

high-end custom homes

crafting spatial poetics with vigas and latillas 

hand peeled by mojados 

whose sweat translates into profit for developers

working at a nifty rate

 

sometimes I go visit these homes

as they are being finished

 may I help you? 

I am asked by the realtor

standing at the door,

thinking that I may be the guy

who mixed the mud and pushed the wheelbarrow

 

I introduce myself as the designer

 oh, well, it’s so nice to meet you, what a wonderful job!please, come in. 

 

I was once asked by a home magazine journalist

if I felt insulted by such incidentswell, no, I said, my mind mixing for an answera good batch of cement is never accidental 

 

last year on my way up through Santa Fe

I made a detour and drove by a house of my design

the season’s first snow on the ground,

smoke rising out of the fireplace chimney

 

inch by inch

I know that house

through its X, Y, and Z axis

 

but, I cannot approach the front door

knock and expect to be invited in

to sit in the corner of my pleasing

and lounge around with the owner

as we sip on cups of hot herbal tea

making small talk about the weather

or discussing a reading

by the latest author come through

as the sun’s last light

streams in gallantly

through the window

just where I placed it

and for that reason

 

I take a handful of snow to my mouth

toss another into the air

my blessings upon the inhabitantsque Dios los bendiga y les dé más 

my grandfather would have said

 

I turn my car toward home

to my mother’s house

a place near and far to me

she, my mother, is bedridden

and my brother is the self-appointed caretaker

to bathe and feed her

bring her morsels of conversation

 

it is their own world now

 

ruled by a juxtaposition of understanding

against what I have come to know, now

here, so far and away

I am greeted at her front yard

by an old, propped up trunk hood

proclaiming my brother’s spray-painted inscription

         Jesus Saves 

on the opposite side it reads

         Keep Out! 

 I guess it just depends on what kind of day he’s having, 

someone once remarked

like a rattlesnake

it’s a fair warning

 

years ago I accepted this madness

and called it not my ownit’s better that he be drunk on Christ, said my motherthan on what he used to drink 

 

we all agreed

"
"

Now begins the festival and rivalry of late fall,

the weird debauch and daring debacle

of frat-boy parties as students parade foggy streets in mock

processions, bearing on shoulders scrawny effigies of dead,

defeated Indians cut from trees, where,

in the twilight, they had earlier been hung.

 

""Just dummies,"" laughs our dad, ""Red Indians hung

or burned—it's only in jest."" Every fall

brings the Big Game against Stanford, where

young scholars let off steam before the debacle

they may face of failed exams. ""You're dead

wrong,"" he says to Mom. ""They don't mock

 

real, live Indians."" Around UC campus, mock

lynchings go on. Beneath porches we see hung

the scarecrow Natives with fake long braids, dead

from the merrymaking. On Bancroft Way, one has fallen

indecorously to a lawn, a symbol of the debacle

that happened three generations ago in California's hills, where

 

Native peoples were strung up. (A way of having fun? Where

did they go, those Indian ghosts?) ""Their kids perform mock

war dances, whooping, re-enacting scenes of a debacle

white folks let loose,"" chides Mom. ""Meanwhile we hang

portraits of presidents on school walls and never let fall

the old red, white, and blue. My dear brother is dead

 

because he fought in a White man's war. How many dead

Indians do they need to feel okay? This whole thing wears

on my soul."" In the dark car we go silent, and the fall

night gets chillier. In yards, blazing bonfires mock

the stars that glow palely somewhere above. A thin moon hangs

over the tule fogs. I've never heard the word ""debacle”

 

before and wonder what it means. ""What's a debacle,

Mom? "" I ask. ""Oh, honey, it's a terrible and deadly

collapse. Complete ruin."" I've noticed how the hung

Indians have their heads slumped forward. They wear

old clothes, headbands with feathers, face paint, moc-

casins instead of boots. Little do we know, this fall,

 

living Indians at Feather Falls

leave tobacco to mark that, indeed,

we're still here, lungs full of indigenous air.

"
"

We could hear her

knocking down strands of cobweb

from ceilings—sticky filaments,

sacs of eggs—as we woke most mornings

to a worm of discontent.

It lodged beneath the heart,

rubbed our frayed nerves,

gnawed at the gut, spleen,

ovaries. Filth

 

was Mom's first enemy, so each day

began with ritual cleaning: the stab

and sweep of the broom down the dark hall,

over the stained and scratched oak floors.

 

For weeks, she held her dust mop

one-handed, and with the other

cupped a hernia, while she swore

at us kids in that hard voice—a litany of our sins

and failures: sloth,

stupidity, secrecy.

 

We watched her

smash the spiders that ran, herky-jerky,

along the baseboards, while we ran, too.

 

Glaring at each other,

we gathered up the scattered

laundry, our father’s shoes,

his newspapers and tools, our books,

drawings, music, sweatshirts,

and jackets, whatever

we’d left lying around.

 

We were guilty, but good

at evasion. We cultivated

shrewish or obsessive behaviors of our own: my tough

older sister sneered and stalked out of the house

to meet her boyfriend;

my sweet younger sister

trembled and cried, comforted

by one of our many dogs.

I slammed doors, pounded them

with my fists, screamed, “Shut up,

shut up, shut up!” She couldn’t

 

leave us alone. She loved us

too much.

 

Though we were quick, she was

quicker. Her words stung.

 

We must have deserved it.

"
"

1

Desert heat, high clouds, and sky

the color of lapis. On this journey,

anything seems possible,

so we stop by an ancient cottonwood

to kiss. The beauty trembles,

doesn't say a word, just watches

me, so open. Small birds fly by, flock

in the shady tree above us. What

settles in her heart? What congeals?

Hope? Despair? Far off, the river churns

in its sandy banks, swallows veer, turn

in fiery air. Will these kisses seal

her to me? I her lover, she my wife?

Is all of this a dream, my whole life?

 

2

She is just this side of wonderful,

and suddenly the glamorous world

fills itself with shining and we laugh

at highway monuments that explain

how hard the trek had been for Franciscans

in the Indian wilderness, poor fellows—

conversion is the devil's own

work! Then the stones of her dream

turn up under her feet, the back

of a huge land turtle. I know

we must be circling Paradise

because the ants enter the fleshy petals

of the roadside flowers with evident

joy and purpose (oh, my dark, pretty one).

 

3

Music, my adored. When is there never

music? My accordion puffs up

with drinkable melodies. I spill

her tunes into your listening ear,

one after the other: the squeeze-box

enters the dance of the plaintive gypsy

with its hard rhythms, lilts the back-

breaking labor song the worker croons

to earth, warbles romantic notes of

dissolving borders. You melt

like a woman beneath her lover's touch.

Music is happy and pitiless when

it sets fire to combustible souls. Even

the raspy bandoneon's voice is lyric.

 

4

Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. (Speak

in a whisper.) We slip into this

space half cognizant. The land is very

large indeed: bones of the earth

worn down, though she is a living thing.

See how she exposes her grace? Antelopes

graze on the far plain—their high,

white tails—the red soil throbs

its slow heartbeat, and the blue sky

clears so smartly, perfectly, like

radiance. Are the ancestors near?

What can we know? We decide

to wander around this prairie, mistaken

for Utes, buy commodities in little towns.

 

5

Late afternoon we head west along the willow-banked

Malheur after the long curve of the Snake River plain.

(Above the falls where the Shoshone went to pray

we soaked our feet in cold water, and I observed

the arch of her brown foot.) Rabbitbrush and sage

along the highway, juniper on far hills and bluffs.

Sundown, and dusk falls over the wide basin of land.

In Burns we eat eggs in a cafe, take a room

in the Motel 6. In the dark, I can see

her black hair, black against the pillows. Its clean

scent makes me think of corn. At dawn, I hold her

and there are kisses. Then more kisses. Then more.

The day is cold; a north wind blew last night. But

the land is open. Rain falls in showers of light.

 

6

Her hand on my thigh, my shoulder,

in my hair. She leans over to kiss my cheek.

We look at each other, smile. For miles

we travel this way, nearly silent, point

with eyes or chins at the circling hawk, the king-

fisher on the snag above the swollen

creek. One night I weep in her arms

as she cries, ""Oh, oh, oh!"" because I have touched

her scars lightly: throat, belly, breasts.

In that communion of lovers, thick sobs

break from me as I think of my love

back home, all that I have done

and cannot say. This is the first time

I have left her so completely, so alone.

 

"
"

Ours was a play-filled childhood; irrigation ditches ran deep

during the summers. We played in the water and dirt, then inscribed

ABCs and numbers onto the smooth ground. Our cat Polly died

of rabies; then all the pets had to be shot, some in the rib cage

as they thrashed in panic. There was a pink bruise

on my forehead from pressing against the wall. We couldn't figure

 

out how such a thing could happen. The dogs were steadfast figures

around the farm. They chased strange cars and sometimes invoked deep

panic among visitors and passersby. They had cuts and bruises

from scuffles with roaming packs. No tags were inscribed

with their random Navajo names. Snazzy was skinny; his rib cage

obvious through thin fur. He looked as if he might die

 

from hunger, but he ate like nobody's business. Who knew he would die

of rabies with the rest? The main thing was to figure

out how they contracted it, my parents said. We cried until our rib cages

ached; our eyes stayed swollen. This first loss was too deep

to even talk about. Decades later, I can finally describe

how that summer led us into a grief that felt like a bruise

 

that would last forever. But our neighbor suffered worse bruises:

their huge dog, named Dog, was the first to die

and was the cause of all this. Their home and fields are inscribed

in our memories as ""the rabies place."" Over time, they must have figured

it was too much to live down. Childhood losses run deep,

even though we are grandparents now. The memory is an invisible cage

 

of anguished sobs, gunshots, yelping howls, canine rib cages

exploding. Sometimes we reminisce and notice that the bruises

of grief have turned pale like smoothed-over scars. That initial deep

hurt was the start, we found, of how love could die

right before us, even as we watched: stunned figures

pleading for mercy, urgent prayers saying, ""Let God's scribe

 

mark this down. We've paid our dues. Our hearts are inscribed

with loss after loss."" For some reason, after everything, our rib cages

held up and continued to cradle tender hearts. They must have figured

that all the prayers and careful teachings would prevent bruises

that would weaken us. Our love for those homely animals was deep

 

and would figure in the knowledge that such bruises

aren't endless, and that our rib cages are not mere bones. One can die

from grief, so now we can describe loss and love as the Holy Twins.

"
"







For the graduates of the University of Arizona.







This morning we gather in gratitude for all aspects of sacredness:

the air, the warmth of fire, bodies of water, plants, the land,

and all animals and humankind.

We gather to honor our students who have achieved the extraordinary

accomplishment of earning doctoral or master's degrees.

We gather to honor their parents, grandparents, children,

family members, and friends who have traveled with them

on their path to success. They have traveled far distances to be here

this morning: we honor their devotion.

 

May we remember that holiness exists in the ordinary elements of our lives.

 

We are grateful for a homeland that has always thrived

on a glorious array of people and their diverse cultures, histories,

and beliefs. We acknowledge the generosity of the Tohono O'odham

in granting this land on which we learn, teach, celebrate

accomplishments, and sometimes mourn losses.

 

May we always cherish our ancestors as we prepare for the days ahead.

May we remember that we exist because of their prayers and their faith.

 

We are blessed with distinct and melodious tongues.

Our languages are treasures of stories, songs, ceremonies, and memories.

May each of us remember to share our stories with one another,

because it is only through stories that we live full lives.

 

May the words we speak go forth as bright beads

of comfort, joy, humor, and inspiration.

We have faith that the graduates will inspire others

to explore and follow their interests.

 

Today we reflect a rainbow of creation:

Some of us came from the east, where bright crystals of creativity reside.

They are the white streaks of early morning light when all is born again.

We understand that, in Tucson, the Rincon Mountains are our inspiration

for beginning each day. The Rincons are everlasting and always present.

 

Those who came from the south embody the strength of the blue

mountains that encircle us. The Santa Ritas instill in us

the vigorous spirit of youthful learning.

 

Others came from the west; they are imbued with the quiet, yellow glow of dusk.

They help us achieve our goals. Here in the middle of the valley, the ts'aa',

the basket of life, the Tucson Mountains teach us to value our families.

 

The ones from the north bring the deep, restorative powers of night's darkness;

their presence renews us. The Santa Catalina Mountains teach us that,

though the past may be fraught with sorrow, it was strengthened

by the prayers of our forebearers.

We witnessed the recent fires the mountains suffered,

and in their recovery we see ourselves on our own journeys.

We understand that we are surrounded by mountains, dziił,

and thus that we are made of strength, dziił, nihí níhídziił.

We are strong ourselves. We are surrounded by mountains

that help us negotiate our daily lives.

 

May we always recognize the multitude of gifts that surround us.

May our homes, schools, and communities be filled with the wisdom

and optimism that reflect a generous spirit.

 

We are grateful for all blessings, seen and unseen.

 

May we fulfill the lives envisioned for us at our birth. May we realize

that our actions affect all people and the earth. May we live in the way

of beauty and help others in need. May we always remember that

we were created as people who believe in one another. We are grateful,

Holy Ones, for the graduates, as they will strengthen our future.

 

All is beautiful again.

Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.

Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.

Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.

Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.

"
"







For Marilynn







 Nihideezhí, it was a moist June afternoon when we buried you.

The Oak Springs Valley was dense with sage, cedar, and chamisa;

and gray, green, and brown shrubs cradled the small cemetery.

The sky was huge overhead.

Your son said later, ""Did you see the sky? It was purple.

I knew it would rain,"" he said.

 

The dark Carrizo Mountains were so clear.

 

There were so many people, Sister.

Many of your friends whom we didn't know,

and your former schoolmates whom we remembered as children,

and Sister, we met many relatives for the first time.

 

We cried, not wanting to leave you in that serene place.

We hesitated, though our father, his parents, and their parents

are buried there. Our older sisters thought ahead to bring flowers for them.

They huddled quietly over their graves a few feet away.

 

Shideezhí, remember how red the sand is?

The men—your sons, our nephews, grandsons, and various in-laws—

took turns filling your grave. Their necks and arms were streaked

with dusty sweat. They kept their heads down;

their faces were damp and eyes, swollen.

 

We had to get it all out; we cried

and held each other. My granddaughters hovered near me

as if I might faint or fall unexpectedly.

 

Did you see, Sister, the way the grandchildren fed and served everyone?

They guided the grandparents and the elderly to their chairs.

Once seated, they served plates filled with mutton ribs,

potato salad, corn, thick slabs of oven bread, crispy fry bread,

and Jell-O salad. They placed the salt and pepper—that enduring couple—

before us and implored us to eat. The two delights we relished were good—

hot, strong coffee and cold, crisp diet pop.

 

We ate for you; we consumed your meal, Shideezhí.

We ate to honor the times you cooked for us—

those tasty dishes, scrumptious pastries combined with laughter,

silly childhood memories, and always teasing jokes.

Sister, I didn't know how we would make it;

it is still too much to think of you not being here.

"
"

           We had a grief

we didn't understand while

           standing at the edge of

   some low scrub hills as if

humans were extra

   or already gone;—

 

what had been in us before?

          a life that asks for mostly

    wanting freedom to get things done

in order to feel less

          helpless about the end

of things alone—;

 

when i think of time on earth,

   i feel the angle of gray minutes

          entering the medium days

    yet not ""built-up"":: our

work together: groups, the willing

    burden of an old belief,

 

           & beyond them love, as of

    a great life going like fast

creatures peeling back marked

    seeds, gold-brown integuments

    the color time

  will be when we are gone—

"
"

   —kept losing self control 

    but how could one lose the self

 after reading so much literary theory?

The shorter ""i"" stood under the cork trees,

     the taller ""I"" remained rather passive;

 the brendas were angry at the greed, angry

that the trees would die, had lost interest

 in the posturing of the privileged,

 

   the gaps between can't & won't...

   Stood outside the gate of permissible

       sound & the wind came soughing 

through the doubt debris(soughing comes from swāgh—to resound...

echo actually comes from this also—)

  we thought of old Hegel across

the sea—the Weltgeist—& clouds

 

went by like the bones of a Kleenex...

        it's too late for countries

but it's not too late for trees...

  & the wind kept soughing  with its sound sash, wind with

        its sound sash,    increasing

bold wind with its sound sash,

            increasing bold—

"
"

         Sometimes  ,  when i'm

            very tired  ,    i think

 of extremophiles    ,   chemolithoautotrophs

       & others with     power for changing

    not-life into lives  ,    of those that eat rock

& fire in volcanoes   ,     before the death

 of the world but after   the death of a human

                              ,    of their taste

for ammonia or iron  ,     sulfur & carbon

                             ,   somehow

 enough of it to go on ...     As workers

          taste revolt       ,   they grow

at the vents of oceans   ,     turning mute vapor

into respiration            ,   changing unhinged

   matter to hinges        ,  near the rims of sea

trenches or the caves     ...     Our friend wrote

    of writers living              in gray hiding,

                            ,     of those who love glass

    & early freedom   ,    steep sand

  & late freedom       ,     sex among gentle

     or bitter grasses     ,   those with a taste for

 blue or belligerence   ,   obscure lives, she

called them               ,   the writers

    of radical mind     …

The living prefer life    ,  mostly they do

                         ,   they are ravenous

                         ,    making shapes in groups

    as the dying grow     one thought

          until the end ,   wanting more

              specifics   ,   desert or delay 

          until the i        drops away into          i am not here ,   the mineral other

pumps & vast vapors  ,    ridges & shadows beyond

            the single life it had not thought of—

"
"

Perhaps is a new and sudden way of being.

 

Like satisfaction not yet begun or some other kind

of kindness:

 

a more gentle one?

 

Night makes us all into the middle

of something until we aren't

 

anything anymore. The sky

isn't any color here. It's OK

because consolation is color enough

 

for your cheeks, wind bitten and glorified

by the light of the wine in this glass draining

 

toward a better time, a better space. I invented

a notion of hell, and you invented a notion of hello.

 

Amazing similarities and bizarrely coincidental snow

 

Like a twig falling from an oak's tallest point,

 

I keep wondering when forgiveness

found its way into this world

 

in a time before bargaining and beckoning.

 

It's quiet again and now the sky is a tangled

mess of rags seeking out the bored and unwilling.

 

I'd like to make a map not of the land

but of the path I took to arrive in this place,

 

a map with no idealized purpose,

a map of a thousand airless pines.

"
"

Shadows lengthened while we sat stuck in traffic just beyond San Rafael. Headlights had begun to flare in the cool dusk. The hum of the car's engine lulled me, and I put my forehead against the glass, looking out over a darkening landscape. We were headed to the Bishop's Ranch, a weekend retreat for Episcopal Young Churchmen in hilly country that would someday produce superlative wines with garnet hues that stain the inside of a glass. I was queasy from the lurching of the car, the stops and starts, the smell of exhaust. Though trembling with cold, I was too shy to ask the lady, the mother of one of the other girls, to turn on the heater. I imagined pale pink blossoms on the Japanese plum, apple trees laden with white flowers, and north of Sebastapol the vibrant yellow of daffodils on slender, pleated stems. That night I slept in a single bunk made up with thin sheets and blankets.


 


A warm sun the next day restored me, but in the evening, seated by the fire that crackled in the fireplace of the big lodge, I felt flushed. Our recently ordained curate (we were not to know he was gay till some years later) had asked me to bring my guitar, and now he wanted me to sing about the girl who decides to sleep next to her mother her whole life long instead of falling for an unfaithful suitor. I sang; we all sang together. Young Father W. had a wonderful tenor voice. His smile reassured me, but now I was tired and, earlier than the others, I decided to return to the dorm.


 


In that clear March night, the sky gleamed like black ink and stars blazed, bright and alive. Walking downhill, guitar in hand, I suddenly stumbled with dizziness, and the slope swam before me. “Hold on, hold on,” I told myself as I nearly fell onto the dew-slick lawn. For a moment I could sense myself floating away from my body. Back in the dorm, I crawled into bed and lay shuddering with cold, bones aching. The room seemed to spin. I wanted to be home, but the thought of facing my mother filled me with terrible dismay. I knew the blue failure notice mailed by the school would have arrived.


 


Sure enough, it lay open on the dining table when I got home the following afternoon. A Sunday fog, hardly a mist, had blown in from the bay and was gathering in the eucalyptus across the ravine. The house was steamy. A basket of clean laundry occupied a chair atop a stack of San Francisco Chronicles. Mom sat at the table sewing, but I knew she was scowling. I thought it wise to look industrious, so I began to fold towels and pillowcases. “What I want to know,” began my mother, “is whether you have any ambition? Obviously, you will never get to college. What do you expect to do with your life?” She paused, and I shrugged. “Go ahead and shrug. Do you think your girlfriend is going to take care of you? That won’t last long. And why is it you only fall in love with girls? Well, I suppose you want to be a boy.” What an unutterable failure I am. I retreated, burned by her ferocious, upright anger. “Oh, yes, I’m sure you’re sick! But you will go to school tomorrow!”


 


That night, wracked again with cold, unable to stop my trembling, I sought my parents’ bed, stood moaning till Mom woke and let me under the covers, where she tried to warm me with her body. Weeks later we learned that one of my classmates, a robust girl who shot baskets as well as any boy, had succumbed to the illness and died. That night, my mother placed her hand on my forehead–her smooth palm, her touch, gentle–and said to my barely awake dad, “Our daughter has a raging fever.” Like a miracle, I was still her child. Comforted, I slept.

"
"

What might all songs lean into?

 

               You scramble eggs one moment,

and in the next minute

 

               you're eating them

with dry toast and black coffee

 

               in silence.

 

                              On a day like any day,

your voice is not your own:

 

the grass clippings disrupt

 

a robin too large to fly

from worm to worm.

 

We don't know why we speak,

 

               but yet our voices

persist, even when void of substance—

                              like a dream you'd like

 

     to recall throughout the day,

 

but you don't or you can't

and after a week, it's gone forever.

 

Of course our voices

evolve years before our bodies—

 

our vocal cords vibrate like a heartbeat,

               senselessly. No explanation

needed.

 

Eventually all languages converge.

               Each thought falls

 

into all others. And what thought

               resists being built by words?

 

                              Perhaps fear placed us

               here in this room together:

 

a fear of fire at one point turned

into a fear of God. After that, a fear

 

of godlessness, a room

where a word before

 

               another word and another

 

word after the first

was all we had, all we could

imagine. Somehow

 

an image means

more than the object itself

but not because

 

               it's made of words. Most likely

it's because the act of creation

 

sets the mind down like a bird

               in a field

 

where the speed of the invasive cannot exist.

"
"

 If an idea exists but is never found,

then the stained-glass windows

 

will reflect nothing back to the ear.

Most days filter through the mind,

 

waiting not for movement

but for a road to be built,

 

brick by brick, word by word,

 

weariness replaced with joy,

but what is joy without the years

 

and the way they open constantly,

two or three hearts pumping a volume of blood

 

meant for just one?

 

                                   Our disbelief in the ordinary

emerges from the way we color routine:

 

leaves pile up depending on the wind,

but why pause to notice?

 

Eventually the seasons embrace

what our words will not, the illuminated day

 

just one of a thousand others,

and the names we give back to the world

 

mean ultimately little against the way

 

the sun pleads sense

from the smallest cradle of dew.

"
"

All at once that stubborn dog of a heart

stopped barking at Lady Poetry, jumped

over the wall where the sacred crows of

Kashmir dwelt and said: I've come into

this world to stay. It can't be, protested

the daffy nurses of Pickapoon Hospital.

It can't be, the guardians of the public

order responded in chorus. All at once

that heart stopped leaping, not in his

beloved Buenos Aires where he'd mis-

placed his violin for good or in Ukraine

where José sawed timber and memorized

train schedules. That stubborn dog of a

heart kept singing in the face of turbulence,

never knowing whether the Lady would

arrive. He put bars on his verses because

of issues with his lungs and thanked the

little birds that ate from his hand. He fed

the crows as well—""breadcrumbing,"" he'd

call it—ringing a bell while quoting

mystics in their native tongues. This is

why I've come, he'd say, but all at once

that stubborn dog of a heart stopped

speaking and drew a giant moustache

high up in the spheres. You can see it

if you dare listen to their music.

"
"

If someone tells you that your poem is nostalgic,

take it as a compliment. There's no greater

praise. In Greek, nostos means ""return"" andalgia ""pain."" What's a poem without the return

of pain?  If they tell you that your poem is

melancholic, take that as a compliment, too. In

Greek, melan means ""black"" and khole ""bile.""

What's a poem without the most pernicious disorder

of the body and soul?  Pain and illness.  If your

poem is nostalgic and melancholic, see a doctor.

"
"

There's no cause for vanity and none for

pride: it's just a matter of assembling

words in lines, then dividing them up (or

letting them divide themselves), hoping

they sound good or bad. (What's important

is that they sound like something.) It's all

a question of staying alert so that red doesn't

bleed into orange or orange into yellow or

yellow into silence. There's no cause for

rejecting silence and none for accepting it,

either. We should speak when there's noth-

ing to say and be quiet when others talk.

That's the poet's business, so get used to it.

There's nothing glorious about it. The future

doesn't count for anything and the past just

laughs at us. There's no cause for writing

this poem and none for deleting it, either.

"
"

Empty air has its own mechanism, me dijo. 

Its gears accord to whim.

 

We go out only when we have to, me dijo. 

We have hidden things for breathing.

 

You can't understand it prepped that way, me dijo. 

It always changes, but never readily enough.

 

Some things we say more of and then again, me dijo. 

They always mean less once pre-written.

 

The context connections are far too frail, me dijo. 

To make them you need to pixel-point time.

 

There are no click-in-n-out pictures, me dijo. 

You facet your eyes to see them multiply.

 

There are hands held out everywhere, me dijo. 

We have to be careful what to step around/in.

 

Sometimes we come this close too late, me dijo. 

Then we have to wait for inertia to embrace us.

 

We are the hungry, hungry: so ravenous, me dijo. 

We will tear at your insides and lick them clean.

"
"

I would have come.

When you called. But.

I had the most beautiful pale pink rose.

Its healthy stem was clenched between my teeth. And.

Its thorns bit sharply into my tender wet flesh. So.

 

I couldn't answer you. Still.

My lips moved at you silently.

They offered words you never heard.

They screamed inside my crazed brain. Only.

It could do nothing for you.

 

In time the petals wilted.

They blew away. And.

They became compost in someone else's garden.

The tough, fibrous stem withered.

I bit down hard to snap its grip on me. Then.

 

My teeth fell out.

Its thorns had burrowed into my cheeks.

They had implanted themselves permanently.

They were suckling on my softest tissues. And.

Not long after they sprouted tiny shoots.

 

They coiled their way down.

I still held the memory of your call. And.

The long stemmed beauty lodged next to it.

They cleaved unto the long roots curling down my neck.

My body held tight and listened. Hard.

"
"

The plump lemon,

the spoon's metal

cuts off the shadow,

 

the bursting overflow of pleasure,

the dark night of the shriek,

a nameless fire in the street,

some blackened breadcrumbs...

"
"

Did you know there were hundreds of little

night moths

crowded against the window pane

to catch a glimmer of light?

 

It was the scent of a strange perfume,

from fallen cocoons, sticky sincerity

that made them flee.

 

In this world of protected ruins,

in this circular world

where people tell

and re-tell the same stories,

in this world where people forgot

that the dyke

wouldn't be massive enough to hold back

the sea swell;

in this world where each and every one

would flee in panic in the end;

even the old lady sold

spun silver birds

while she whispered...

 

The tiny, translucent and elegant

night moths

like freshly picked pumpkin seeds

crowded in the corner of that half-open window

clinging to the cold glass,

light eager,

while the vapor filled the room

reaching the nostrils

of colleagues

 

who didn't recognize each other

but intertwining their fingers,

waited for someone else's words

to atone

and explain

and bestow

meaning to words.

"
"

Three women survive.

One hides in a bedroom of a house,

sharpening blades in the bathroom, her night.

Another disinfects the cloth her older sister contaminates.

The third, more tender and insecure, proud and serene,

        takes her first steps,

surrounded by palm trees, lemon trees, pomegranate trees,

        bougainvilleas, birds of paradise...

 

"
"

He plays a train.

She plays a whistle.

They move away.

 

He plays a rope.

She plays a tree.

They swing.

 

He plays a dream.

She plays a feather.

They fly.

 

He plays a general.

She plays people.

They declare war.

"
"

—I want to draw the sky.

—Draw it, my darling.

—I have.

—And why do you spread

the colors this way?

—Because the sky

has no edges.

. . .

—I want to draw the earth.

—Draw it, my darling.

—I have.

—And who is this?

—She is my friend.

—And where is the earth?

—In her handbag.

. . .

—I want to draw the moon.

—Draw it, my darling.

—I can't.

—Why?

—The waves shatter it

continuously.

. . .

—I want to draw paradise.

—Draw it, my darling.

—I have.

—But I don't see any colors.

—It is colorless.

. . .

—I want to draw the war.

—Draw it, my darling.

—I have.

—And what is this circle?

—Guess.

—A drop of blood?

—No.

—A bullet?

—No.

—Then, what?

—The button

that turns off the lights.

"
"

Yesterday I lost a country.

I was in a hurry,

and didn't notice when it fell from me

like a broken branch from a forgetful tree.

Please, if anyone passes by

and stumbles across it,

perhaps in a suitcase

open to the sky,

or engraved on a rock

like a gaping wound,

or wrapped

in the blankets of emigrants,

or canceled

like a losing lottery ticket,

or helplessly forgotten

in Purgatory,

or rushing forward without a goal

like the questions of children,

or rising with the smoke of war,

or rolling in a helmet on the sand,

or stolen in Ali Baba's jar,

or disguised in the uniform of a policeman

who stirred up the prisoners

and fled,

or squatting in the mind of a woman

who tries to smile,

or scattered

like the dreams

of new immigrants in America.

If anyone stumbles across it,

return it to me, please.

Please return it, sir.

Please return it, madam.

It is my country. . .

I was in a hurry

when I lost it yesterday.

"
"

Shook the box like a maraca.

 

Stood around like a dope in my punch-colored dress, clutching your box

to my chest.

 

Opened your plastic receptacle, the size of a jack-in-the-box. But instead

of gaudy stripes, your box is sober-suit blue, hymnal blue.

 

Tasted them. You've gained a statue's flavor, like licking the pyramids, or

kissing sandstone shoulders. I mean boulders.

 

Remarked to your box: ""REINCARNATION comes from roots meaning 'to

be made flesh again.'""

 

Stowed your box under my bed for a week to seed dreams in which you

advise me. (This didn't work.)

 

Opened the Babylonian Talmud at random. Read aloud to your gritty,

gray-white powder: ""There are three keys which the Holy One, blessed be

He, has not entrusted into the hands of any messenger. These are: the key

of rain, the key of birth, and the key of the resurrection of the dead.""

Worked myself up to watery eyes. Any intensity evaporated the instant I

stopped reading.

 

Tried to intuit your format, sift it from tides of void. Does shape play a

role? My watch ticked in an exaggerated way. Closed my eyes, sent forth

mental tendrils seeking the nothing of you. They curled back on them-

selves, weaving around the wing chair, a dog's leg, a lamp stand, eventu-

ally heading back toward the nothing of me.

"
"

lives on an island

of last-ditch attempts

and ancient consolations

 

after the shipwreck

she swam ashore near naked

hands scraped raw on coral

bra and panties soaked through

sand in her teeth

lapped by aftermath

lying exhausted

slowly approaching

the condition of music

 

he loved her stubborn luster

sure they argued sometimes

the word ""argue"" from Latin

meaning to make clear

while she sat quietly

in the wing chair

her eyes closed

police ransacked his desk

the note turned up in his pocket

with the letter for his sister

a baseball ticket stub

receipts for two ""taco platters""he whose soul was bound up with mine

and part of a bookmark

 

six weeks later she looks great

thin and translucent

a statue of justice sans blindfold

she wears beautiful blouses now

peach, gold, seedling green

her complexion

has never been better

lushness nips at the heels

of destruction

 

tonight's lurid sunset's

a cocktail of too many boozes

she'd like to switch it off

via remote control

but there's no antidote

for celestial events

 

a frantic bat takes a wrong turn

from the attic veers

into her living

room, bounces off walls

a sick flut-thud each time it hits

the suicide's wife

pulls out her roasting pan

climbs the kitchen counter

teeters and grabs

for twenty minutes

at last claps on the lid

walks her prize outside

 

releases the creature

into the trees

where the lawn peters out

where the idea that at death

something is liberated

can flap blackly away.

"
"

The dissonance of women. The shrill frilly silly

drippy prissy pouty fuss of us. And all the while

science was the music of our minds. Our sexual

identities glittery as tinsel, we fretted about god's

difficulties with intimacy, waiting for day's luster

to fade so we could slip into something less

venerated. Like sea anemones at high tide

our minds snatched at whatever rushed by.

Hush, hush, my love. These things happened

a long time ago. You needn't be afraid of them, now.

"
"

All the kids came rumbling down the wood tenement

Shaky stairs, sneakers slapping against the worn

Tin tread edges, downhall came Pepo, Chino, Cojo,

Curly bursting from the door like shells exploding

Singing ""I'm a Rican Doodle Dandy"" and ""What shall

We be today, Doctors or Junkies, Soldiers or Winos?""

 

Pepo put a milk crate on a Spanish Harlem johnny pump

And drops opened like paratroopers carrying war news.

 

Then Urban Renewal attacked the pump, cleared the slums

Blamed Puerto Rico and dispersed the Spies, blasting

Them into the Army or Anywhere Avenue in the Bronx.

 

And nobody, but nobody, came back from that summer.

 

Just as Korea was death in service to the warring Nation

The Bronx was death in service to the negligent Nation

"
"

Puerto Rico was created when the pumpkin on top of

The turtle burst and its teeming waters poured out

With all mankind and beastkind riding on the waves

Until the water drained leaving a tropical paradise.

 

Puerto Rico was stumbled on by lost vampires bearing

Crucifix in one hand, arquebus in the other, sucking

The veins of land and men, tossing the pulp into the

Compost heap which they used as the foundation for

Their fortifications and other vainglorious temples.

 

Puerto Rico was arrested just as it broke out of the

Spanish jail and, renamed a trusty, it was put in an

American cell. When the prisoner hollered, ""Yankee, Go

Home,"" Puerto Rico was referred to the United Nations.

 

Puerto Rico, to get to paradise now, you have to ride blood.

 

"
"

Monterosa, your body is dead on Avenue A. Angelo,

They found you eyes open staring at the beer

Soaked floorboards. Did you want that? Did

You mind them filling your back with buckshot?

 

Angelo, I am angry with them all, and you Monterosa

Killed and killers, killing and dealing dope. No good

You were, no good they are. Still, I wish their fate

To be bodies stacking under the same blue smoke.

 

Monterosa, there is blood on your song, blood on the juke

Box. The cowbell, the conga, and your corpse form the trio

That is the rhinestone pin of my failure, your failure,

Our failure, who loved, but did not rescue Angelo.

 

Angel, hold him, while I bury him in these clean words,

And pray to see the resurrection of the rose mountain.

"
"

We feel the volt inside our veins,

inside the vines, inside the rain,

and through the capillaries of

a tree. We feel the pulse above

in storms, vibrato of thunder,

the whispering rhythms of a river,

magnetic currents in the earth,

the alternating flow of breath,

the push of tides, reversing air

from caves, dilating hum and dance

of bees, the chant of auctioneer.

All oscillate together, or

they seem to, in this play of chance,

beneath the stars' indifference.

"
"

What a surprise it is to hear

that locusts come the thirteenth year

and not the seventeenth as told

for ages and enshrined in old

folklore and rhymes and family lies.

The species similar otherwise:

cicadas books call periodic,

found here in our southern district.

They grow from eggs pressed into twigs.

The nymphs that hatch then start to dig

at least ten inches into soil,

and live by sucking juicy oil

from roots and stems, sweet sap

that nourishes through the giant nap,

and then the lucky thirteenth year

they grow a polished armor

and crawl into the summer air

and, louder than a Mahler choir,

fill meadow, hedge, and orchard grove

with necessary calls for love,

then leave their eggs to fortune's whim

with Philip Glass-like requiem.

"
"

He brings me chocolate from the Pentagon,

dark chocolates shaped like tanks and fighter jets,

milk chocolate tomahawks, a bonbon

like a kirsch grenade, mint chocolate bayonets.

He brings me chocolate ships, a submarine

descending in a chocolate sea, a drone

unmanned and filled with hazelnut praline.

He brings me cocoa powder, like chocolate blown

to bits. Or chocolate squares of pepper heat.

Or if perhaps we've fought, he brings a box

of truffles home, missiles of semisweet

dissolving on the tongue. He brings me Glocks

and chocolate mines, a tiny transport plane,

a bomb that looks delicious in its cellophane.

"
"

I can enter the morning with traces of an eternal dream: to live

on a planet of women. we sing in the fertile forest, caress on

lavender hills, bathe beneath cascades of clear waters. and just

like that, nude and wet, we mount each other’s bodies. our

desire is a whale that searches for calm in the depth of the sea.

 

I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.

 

the dream perfumes all of my days. I go to the post office and

look for stamps with etchings of flowers and fruits so that I can

send letters to the women who loved me in my sleep.

 

we are in a world that is not ours. what do we do with the

dreams that touch our consciousness in the nude each night?

 

our planet of women is nothing more than a dream. who knows

how many of us bathe in the woods or which ones of us have

wings that let us fly with our flesh? it’s not for anyone to know.

fortunately, we always dream paradise, we make it ours. there,

we find each other and live in our collective memory.

 

and so, I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.

"
"

For those of us who live at the shoreline

standing upon the constant edges of decision

crucial and alone

for those of us who cannot indulge

the passing dreams of choice

who love in doorways coming and going

in the hours between dawns

looking inward and outward

at once before and after

seeking a now that can breed

futures

like bread in our children’s mouths

so their dreams will not reflect

the death of ours;

 

For those of us

who were imprinted with fear

like a faint line in the center of our foreheads

learning to be afraid with our mother’s milk

for by this weapon

this illusion of some safety to be found

the heavy-footed hoped to silence us

For all of us

this instant and this triumph

We were never meant to survive.

 

And when the sun rises we are afraid

it might not remain

when the sun sets we are afraid

it might not rise in the morning

when our stomachs are full we are afraid

of indigestion

when our stomachs are empty we are afraid

we may never eat again

when we are loved we are afraid

love will vanish

when we are alone we are afraid

love will never return

and when we speak we are afraid

our words will not be heard

nor welcomed

but when we are silent

we are still afraid

 

So it is better to speak

remembering

we were never meant to survive.

"
"

I hear a book being written, my sister says, or is it a poem?

 

Her eyes are closed.

 

It has a lot of semicolons.

 

 

One sentence or two? she wants to know. Comma? Period.

 

Well, I say, semicolons join and separate.

 

 

Grammar, my sister says, is very interesting.

"
"

Chemo      Tarceva     prayer

meditation    affirmation      Xanax

Avastin     Nebulizer     Zofran

Zoloft     Vicodin     notebooks

nurses     oxygen tank     pastina

magical thinking     PET scans     movies

therapy     phone calls     candles

acceptance     denial     meatloaf

doctors     rosary beads     sleep

Irish soda bread     internet     incantations

visitors     sesame oil     pain patches

CAT scans     massage     shopping

thin sliced Italian bread with melted mozzarella

St. Anthony oil     Lourdes water     St. Peregrine

tea     spring water     get well cards

relaxation tapes     recliner     cooking shows

cotton T-shirts     lawn furniture     a new baby

giving up Paris     giving up Miami     charts

bargaining     not bargaining     connections

counting with her     breathing for her     willPride and Prejudice     Downton Abbey     prayer

watching TV     not watching TV     prayer

prayer     prayer     prayer

lists   

 

"
"

We start stopping when she’s afraid

something bad will happen. Don’t worry,

I say, all will be well.

 

How could she know? She’s never

read it, never heard of Elizabeth

and Jane, never wanted Mr. Darcy. Like me

 

she needs to know how things will end.

I know Elizabeth will be fine. As I knew,

last week, my sister weeping, that Elinor–

 

sobbing, begging–wouldn’t lose Marianne.

It’s Jane Austen! My sister doesn’t know that

in Austen nothing really bad happens. I leave her

 

on the couch with the last hours.

How much my sister will have to endure,

alone, with this new drama.

 

Later her message. The last one

in which she will sound like herself.Hi, it’s me. The movie was unbelievable. 

 Unbelievable. 

 

"
"

and you press into the dark, imagine

the stranger two rows back, that fragile

chance you’ll forget in the second trailer.

 

Now it’s quiet, still

this burden of being watcher and screen

and what floats across it–light pouring out

 

its time and necklines and train wrecks.

What a relief to yield to the EXIT

sign red “I” blinking like a candle.

 

Soon the enormous figures moving

across rooms, the emphatic narrative

arcs. (There’s the thrum of the subway,

 

its engine of extras.) Here now

the beginning of trivia tests. Warning puppets

with brown-bag faces and fringy hair.

 

You’re almost here. But what you want

is the after. How yourself you are now

walking into the night, full moon over Houston Street,

 

at the bright fruit stand touching the yellow

mums. Here you are: Woman with Cilantro

listening to the rattle of the wrap,

 

the paper sound paper makes after you

have heard movie paper. Apples are more apples.

Paper more paper. Cilantro, its sweaty green self.

"
"

I wait for you to come

to brush your shoe against

the blade of grass I'm sitting on

touch me with your hand

as you reach for one last

violet to take home

 

or pick up a worm to place

gracefully in the garden

 

even better if you lie

on a hillside to watch the sunset

or breathe in stars

 

I will feel your warmth, bury

my head next to that freckle

on your calf, that hair

on your forearm, or just behind

the lobe of your left ear

 

I promise not to take too much

blood into my swelling body

 

only what I think I need

 

and I will never

let you know I am here

though I will love you

 

deeply

 

  

"
"

My cousin, Milton, worked for a cable company.

The boy I knew when we were children

 

had fists that were often clenched, his face set like

an old man whose life had been so hard,

 

it hardened him. But the man's hands opened to let

more of the world in. He sent the funniest

 

cards to family and friends at Christmas, laid down

cable so others could connect. Yet, he lived

 

alone, kept to himself much of the time, so when

his sister found his body, he'd been gone

 

a good while. He died young at fifty-seven, without

fuss or bother. No sitting by the bedside

 

or feeding him soup. He just laid himself down like

a trunk line and let the signal pass through.

 

"
"

I'm just an assistant with the Vanishing Act.

My spangled wand points out the disappeared.

It's only a poor thing made of words, and lacks

the illusive power to light the darkling year.

 

Not prophecy, not elegy, but fact:

the thing that's gone is never coming back.

 

Late or soon a guttering silence will ring down

a curtain like woven smoke on thickening air.

The audience will strain to see what's there,

the old magician nowhere to be found.

 

For now, I wear a costume and dance obliquely.

The applause you hear is not for me, its rabid sound

like angry rain—as one by one the known forms cease to be:

childhood, the farm, the river, forested ground;

the tiger and the condor, the whale, the honeybee;

the village, the book, the lantern. Then you. Then me.

"
"

I prefer

warm fur,

a perfect fire

to lie beside,

a cozy lap

where I can nap,

an empty chair

when she's not there.

I want heat

     on my feet

     on my nose

     on my hide.

No cat I remember

dislikes December

     inside.

"
"

april is a dog's dream

the soft grass is growing

the sweet breeze is blowing

the air all full of singing feels just right

so no excuses now

we're going to the park

to chase and charge and chew

and I will make you see

what spring is all about

 

 

"
"







                                   —in memory of 


                    Cynthia Hurd, Susie Jackson, Ethel Lance, 


                    Rev. Depayne Middleton-Doctor, 


                    Hon. Rev. Clementa Pinckney, 


                    Tywanza Sanders, Rev. Daniel Simmons Sr., 


                    Rev. Sharonda Singleton, Myra Thompson 


                    Shot and killed while at church. 


                    Charleston, SC (6-18-2015), RIP


 







                           poem by        poem

we can end the violence

every day                        after

            every other day

9 killed in Charleston, South Carolina

they are not 9 they

are each one

                                         alive

we do not know

             you have a poem to offer

it is made of action—you must

search for it     run

outside and give your life to it

when you find it    walk it

back—blow upon it

carry it taller than the city where you live

when the blood comes down

do not ask          if

               it is your blood   it

is made of

              9             drops

                             honor them

wash them stop them

from falling

"
"

Last night, I went to a gay bar

with a man I love a little.

After dinner, we had a drink.

We sat in the far-back of the big backyard

and he asked, What will we do when this place closes?

I don't think it's going anywhere any time soon, I said,

though the crowd was slow for a Saturday,

and he said—Yes, but one day. Where will we go?

He walked me the half-block home

and kissed me goodnight on my stoop—

properly: not too quick, close enough

our stomachs pressed together

in a second sort of kiss.

I live next to a bar that's not a gay bar

—we just call those bars, I guess—

and because it is popular

and because I live on a busy street,

there are always people who aren't queer people

on the sidewalk on weekend nights.

Just people, I guess.

They were there last night.

As I kissed this man I was aware of them watching

and of myself wondering whether or not they were just.

But I didn't let myself feel scared, I kissed him

exactly as I wanted to, as I would have without an audience,

because I decided many years ago to refuse this fear—

an act of resistance. I left

the idea of hate out on the stoop and went inside,

to sleep, early and drunk and happy.

While I slept, a man went to a gay club

with two guns and killed forty-nine people.

Today in an interview, his father said he had been disturbed

recently by the sight of two men kissing.

What a strange power to be cursed with:

for the proof of men's desire to move men to violence.

What's a single kiss? I've had kisses

no one has ever known about, so many

kisses without consequence—

but there is a place you can't outrun,

whoever you are.

There will be a time when.

It might be a bullet, suddenly.

The sound of it. Many.

One man, two guns, fifty dead—

Two men kissing. Last night

I can't get away from, imagining it, them,

the people there to dance and laugh and drink,

who didn't believe they'd die, who couldn't have.

How else can you have a good time?

How else can you live?

There must have been two men kissing

for the first time last night, and for the last,

and two women, too, and two people who were neither.

Brown people, which cannot be a coincidence in this country

which is a racist country, which is gun country.

Today I'm thinking of the Bernie Boston photograph

Flower Power, of the Vietnam protestor placing carnations

in the rifles of the National Guard,

and wishing for a gesture as queer and simple.

The protester in the photo was gay, you know,

he went by Hibiscus and died of AIDS,

which I am also thinking about today because

(the government's response to) AIDS was a hate crime.

Now we have a president who names us,

the big and imperfectly lettered us, and here we are

getting kissed on stoops, getting married some of us,

some of us getting killed.

We must love one another whether or not we die.

Love can't block a bullet

but neither can it be shot down,

and love is, for the most part, what makes us—

in Orlando and in Brooklyn and in Kabul.

We will be everywhere, always;

there's nowhere else for us, or you, to go.

Anywhere you run in this world, love will be there to greet you.

Around any corner, there might be two men. Kissing.

 

"
"

Before clock hands showed the time

time ceased, and looking glasses

were veiled as if they still held

familiar faces, in those

last moments when breath shallowed

like a wellspring running dry,

God-words quickened, only then

the dying left death-beds borne

on the arms of the gathered,

lowered to the floor so they

might press close, as though a door

through which to listen and know

the earth's old secrets before

it opened, and they entered.

"
"

All that once was is this,

shattered glass, a rot

of tin and wood, the hum

of limp-legged wasps that ascend

like mote swirls in the heatlight.

                                  

Out front a cherry tree

buckles in fruit, harvested

by yellow jackets and starlings,

the wind, the rain, and the sun.

 

"
"

Here was no place for illumination

the cotton dust thick window-strained light.

The metal squall drowned what could not be shouted

everything geared warping and filling.

 

Though surely there were some times that he paused

my grandfather thinking This is my life

and catching himself before he was caught

lost wages or fingers the risk of reflection.

 

Or another recalled in those reckoning moments

remembering the mountains the hardscrabble farm

where a workday as long bought no guarantee

of money come fall full bellies in winter.

 

To earn extra pay each spring he would climb

the mill's water tower repaint the one word.

That vowel heavy word defined the horizon

a word my grandfather could not even read.

"
"

    Betty, if I set out to write this poem about you

it might turn out instead

to be about me

or any one of

my female relatives

it might turn out to be

about this young native girl

growing up in rural Alberta

in a town with fewer Indians

than ideas about Indians,

in a town just south of the 'Aryan Nations'

 

     it might turn out to be

about Anna Mae Aquash, Donald Marshall or Richard Cardinal,

it might even turn out to be

about our grandmothers,

beasts of burden in the fur trade

skinning, scraping, pounding, packing,

left behind for ‘British Standards of Womanhood,'

left for white-melting-skinned women,

not bits-of-brown women

left here in this wilderness, this colony.

 

     Betty, if I start to write a poem about you

it might turn out to be

about hunting season instead,

about 'open season' on native women

it might turn out to be

about your face       young and hopeful

staring back at me      hollow now

from a black and white page

it might be about the 'townsfolk'    (gentle word)

townsfolk who 'believed native girls were easy'

and 'less likely to complain if a sexual proposition led to violence.'

 

     Betty, if I write this poem.

 

"
"

The story goes from in a rainfall

to sister walking a field

browned autumn. And when she arrives

winter has come, so the old man

rises from his chair, picks up

matches, pipes and tools, and

walks out to begin again.

 

The sculptures grow by the day,

birds in ice, recognizable

eagles, a bear who began

as a man in a moment of dance.

He does this in ice, all

winter carving at dawn,

carving at dusk.

 

And sister after walking a field

browned autumn, arrives, watches

from the east window, waits,

goes out to him in spring,

taps him on the shoulder

and points to the pools

of water he's standing over.

"
"

More than a hundred dollars of them.

 

It was pure folly. I had to find more glass things to stuff

        them in.

 

Now a white and purple cloud is breathing in each corner

 

of the room I love. Now a mass of flowers spills down my

        dining table—

 

each fresh-faced, extending delicate leaves

 

into the crush. Didn't I watch

 

children shuffle strictly in line, cradle

 

candles that dribbled hot white on their fingers,

 

chanting Latin—just to fashion Sevilla's Easter? Wasn't I sad?

        Didn't I use to

 

go mucking through streambeds with the skunk cabbage

        raising

 

bursting violet spears?—Look, the afternoon dies

 

as night begins in the heart of the lilies and smokes up

 

their fluted throats until it fills the room

 

and my lights have to be not switched on.

 

And in close darkness the aroma grows so sweet,

 

so strong, that it could slice me open. It does.

 

I know I'm not the only one whose life is a conditional clause

 

hanging from something to do with spring and one tall room

        and the tremble of my phone.

 

I'm not the only one that love makes feel like a dozen

 

flapping bedsheets being ripped to prayer flags by the wind.

 

When I stand in full sun I feel I have been falling headfirst for

        decades.

 

God, I am so transparent.

 

So light.

 

"
"

 I. ADMIRAL

 

Laid out on vellum, the past

is a long wound. It unfolds

five centuries later,

beneath the heavy pens of scholars.

The world shifts and spins

as the Admiral's bronze astrolabe

measures the paths between stars.

The sky is written in the sea's

uneasy mirror, and mermaids

comb their hair in the distance.They are not, he writes, so beautifulas I have heard. He dreams of his own

circuitous route to the Heavens.

God and the Crown. Both want too much.

 

II. GOVERNOR

 

At Guanahani, they swam to the caravel

bearing parrots and balls of cotton thread,

these people so unlike him they could not

not be saved.

                        Too angry to sleep,

the Governor haunts every room in his castle.

The servants whisper in their own tongue.

 

The severed hands of the Taino

wave in clear salt water,

in pink-tinted water.

They wave as the gold mines dry up,

as the Governor leaves Hispaniola in chains.

 

Mermaids, dog-headed men and women

with breastplates of copper—

They draw their bows, and arrows

cover the shore of Columbus's dream.

No, not the Taino, whom he once called in dios.

They touch his white skin.

They have the faces of Christian angels.

"
"

I.

The people who watch me hang my coat

on a peg at the office don't even know

about that other life,

the life when there was you, it,

however briefly. To them my body

is a fact casual as the weather.

I could tell them:

That day it rained

the way it rains in the New World.

Leaves struck the window like daggers.

I didn't think about God

but the ones we used to worship

the ones who want your heart still

beating, who load you with gold

and lure you to sleep

deep in the cenote.

 

II.

A girl, he said, and I nodded

though we couldn't have known.

I would have left him then

for ten thousand pesos.

I don't know what world you inhabit,

swimming there, baby, not-baby,

part of my body, not me,

swept aside like locks of hair

or toenail parings.

It's ten years today

and you who were never alive

pull a face in the leaves

of jacaranda, the only tree

that lives outside my window.

It must be your voice

whistling through the office window,

though I can't understand your words.

Comfort or accusation,

I can't understand your words.

"
"

How can we die when we're already

prone to leaving the table mid-meal

like Ancient Ones gone to breathe

elsewhere. Salt sits still, but pepper's gone

rolled off in a rush. We've practiced dying

for a long time: when we skip dance or town,

when we chew. We've rounded out

like dining room walls in a canyon, eaten

through by wind—Sorry we rushed off;

the food wasn't ours. Sorry the grease sits

white on our plates, and the jam that didn't set—

use it as syrup to cover every theory of us.

"
"







          Be willing to dismantle for the purpose

          of rebuilding on more solid structure.

                                                                 —Horoscope


 







First you must lift the idea

(be careful it may be heavy)

and haul it out to the dumpster.

Next locate the meaning—it may not

come easily, though if you have

the right tools and they are good tools

you should have no difficulty. Now

it is the sentences' turn: take each one

strip it of grammar (you may need

abrasives here) and hang them all

on a line. When thoroughly dried,

lay each one down on the grass or

if you live in the city, the sidewalk will do.

The point is, make sure you put them

in harm's way, wherever you are.

Don't try to protect them. It may be

they will go to war, or wander the desert

or haunt the streets like beggars

or run from the police or suffer

loneliness and despair. Remember:

they must make their own way. The best

you can do is to stay out of theirs

and take them back in if they return.

"
"

This is a paean to relief and ecstasy.

A man's poem of course—the electric ah!

in the long stream arcing a rainbow

under the spotlight moon, a covenant between

mv body and the earth's.

                                             I think of Li Po smiling

silently on Green Mountain and can hear Rumi

drunk on rapture—drink my brother he calls to me,

think of the elephant loosening a great ebullient

stream that floats a river past your house and drop

turds so immense you could build a hut from them

along the shore to shelter your children.

                                                                           What release!

Think of your child pedaling under your hand

and of a sudden—it just happens—you let go

and he's off on his own, free for that first time—

the achieve of, the mastery of the child.

See the stalwart trees in their silence

the stones resting in the driveway, the cat curled asleep

on the front porch, the smear of blood

on the lion's mouth sitting over his fresh gazelle

the morning paper and its stories shouting

for attention. The plenitude of it all.

                                                                And perhaps                    

somewhere a friend is dreaming of me, or someone

a stranger is peeing ecstatic under the same moon.

A covenant then between us.

                                                    True or not. It is no matter.                                    

 

"
"

That summer night

Was hot

Steaming like a crab

Luscious under the shell

 

Televisions gone bleary

Blinked

In front of men

In undershirts drinking beer

 

Wives upstairs took showers

Caught

A glimpse of their backs

In hallway mirrors

 

I sat in the dark

Invisible

On the backporch

Drinking in the night

 

And it tasted good

So good

Going down

And somebody like me

 

Blew night through an alto sax

Blew and blew

His cooling breath

His hot cool breath on me—

 

And I came alive

Glowing

In the dark

Listening like a fool

"
"

But keep writing.

Write by the glow of the windows,

the roof alight

like a red-haired girl,

you in the back yard, safe.

 

The ladybug's flown away.

Recall her flit and armored crawl.

To the last breath of summer.

Upon the circular of winter.

 

The man may have left.

This doesn't stop

the writing. Between

the pages, a slight blur.

The man may have been old

and ill, or young

who stopped trying

to be with you.

Ghost days.

 

You're swimming across

a deep lake with a soul

you're making.

You save the swimmer,

the sailor,

the drowned,

the damned

and the beloved.

"
"

My ancestors were not diligent

and so they lived beside the fort

that's neither on the maps of Heaven,

Nor of Hell.

In these lands, there is no difference

between a star and thrown car keys.

Chicken nuggets hatch from the eggs of eagles.

I grow dirty while bathing in bottled water.

My bed comforter is a wet parking lot,

I wrap myself up in.

If I eat in the morning, there's nothing left in the evening

My dish of grass and cigarette butts topped with expired coupons.

Stir all I like; I never swallow it down.

All the while, my rabbit's foot runs about

from Las Cruces to West Memphis

searching for flawless luck.

The more one cries, the more one prospers . . .

O' ancestral demon, may my lamentation become verbal sorcery.

"
"

I come from Inuit oil money,

From instruments of chance and divination.

The most loose, shut in, wavering mind,

Recording my day with recitations, antennae,

Narration and figure, my phone might die. I'm walking dirty.

Shop and mob cops, not to touch my mother's breast

Or the queen's royal crown signature

Izzy Juju—hijacked, forsaking all others.

The untamed scotch is mine. It cost the picture a fortune

To say nothing of my turban, costume copies

Of topaz bracelets, the umpteenth translation.

Did you ever know Micah, Gay Sunshine, Grace Cathedral, Coconut?

I went from heels at Barneys to the depths of the bins.

Who could be like dropping in? I'll fold both my hands

In gloves and wait, Hope Diamond peeking out.

"
"

photos of her father

in enemy uniform—

the taste of almonds

"
"

It was wartime

Daisies and Maisies in overalls

Worked in factories

Snapping gum in their teeth

Ration spunk

To keep them going

 

Through weekend tours

At the local USO

Or late nights

Checking hats

For the Willard rooftop garden

It was rough

 

Making ends meet

While their men were at war

In radio worlds

And newspaper print

Nights at home were spent reading

 

Letters over and over

Like prayers

Mouths shaped

To the words

And Hershey bars

Melted on radiators

"
"

I carry my spikes and step on the field an hour ahead of the others. Last day of March with April offering tickets for the new season. I'm full of sun on wet grass, in love with blistered benches.A sparrow sits on the backstop, watching, ready to dart if I catch its eye. I drop my bag on home plate and swirl my foot in the dust the way my cousin does with his fingers on the skin of a drum head. Next yearhe'll be released with the others who spent mornings breaking windows and trashing vacation homes like drunks in the right field bleachers. Here, I'm alone with a sparrow and the smell of a baseball morningsettling around me like a comforter. I start trotting to first base, the ankles loosening, then the knees, as the dust begins to lift into the breaking light. Around second and third I stretch my armsin a rotary motion ready to fly. A hand waves back from a passing car, someone who knows me or remembers rising one morning when the game of who you are is played out in your mind,and around you a stadium full of fans begs youto do what you usually do in the clutch. The bat I pullfrom the bag for the first time is my father's Louisville Slugger, thirty-three inches, wood barrel.I thought enough time had passed, the attic dust hard in the grooves. I stroke it slowly like a weaponyou love to touch but would never use. He hit .304at Omaha the season he was drafted, all-starrookie-of-the-year. He said we'd join him soon.Then that other draft. He would have been here.I swear he would. The silence feels oppressive now.I dig for a scuffed ball and throw it up, shoulder high,but let it fall. A natural hitter, my father said, holdingmy hands. I grip the tar-stained handle. Tears blurthe wall that's so far away it looks warped. I aimfor marrow deep inside, April hungry for the kill.

"
"







           Tell me how you die and I will tell you 

           who you are.

                                       Octavio Paz







I stand in line. The woman ahead of me, blowzy-haired and angry, is told that grace is the act of restraint and road-kill is not a sport. She can choose to wait or test the judgment at another entrance. I know that morality, penance, a kind heart don't matter, nor the faith I embraced or didn't, the people I saved. I know the key is where I land on the scale of commitment.Earnhardt, Sr., died for the game, and got in. Many ancient Egyptians buried juggling balls with them, as though endless practice and craft were their gifts to the next world. They entered. I ask if I can peek in, maybe stand on the edge and look into the vast canyon of pits, arenas, fields, fairways, pools, rings, tables, tracks, courts, beaches, forests, mountainswhere war is forbidden. Here is what I bring for review: a nasty fastball, a runner-up ring, individual initiative, a contrary attitude, the heart of a poet. I bring a willingness to run like an outlaw, honor the Greeks and Makahiki, invent new games, practice past dusk, play on the second squad, and keep score until I can get in the game with eternity left on the clock. I hope it is enough.

"
"

Mary Magdalene                                        Virgin Mother                                                                Mary, Sister of Martha"
"

Mahogany maple syrup runs in spider web lines.My father never uses the stuff, heeats pancakes, powdered, butter moist.When I was a child, he knew more of straightness. Lines and razors were friends.One night he tried to die by his hand. A girljumped before he walked to the ledge.Her mangled body wore the rails like a girdle,her limbs so thin they became a blood putty. Angel,her name. They had to lift the train to take her out.

"
"

I. I borrow wings from other angels, coastthe streets to find feathers loosely attachedto slender silver ties. With care, I close the catchand fasten cardboard stiffened form so closeI cannot breathe or fly for the airpushed out into a world in masquerade.I am African. I am goddess with flaresounding the trumpets. I call out God.Meaning changes like sea water in storm.I part the crowds until, beaten, my wingsfly, fall, litter the streets. I cradle the newborntwins and realize that I am fallen,a lesser angel, wingless and depressed.I am seductress unpetaled, undressed.II.dress her navel in lotus flowersto swim in the pool of her abdomentwine orange blossoms in her hairand smell the scent of oils and natural perfumekiss her nipples so that they become pyramidswet from a summer rain of tonguepress her down into soft linens with hardbody folding into hers like tributary waterswarm her hands against heated chestthat covers drum rhythms resoundingmen, worship your women this waywomen, flush at the adorationand you will know how I feelwhen he touches my hand

"
"

I.The time has come for the nation to turna new page by righting wrongs of the past.We apologise for laws and policies that inflictedprofound grief, suffering, and loss and for the removalof children from families, communities, and country.For the pain of these, their descendants, and for familiesleft behind, to mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters,for indignity inflicted on a proud people, we say sorry.We resolve that the injustices of the past must never,never happen again and look to a future based on mutualrespect, where all, whatever their origins, are equal partners.Spoken by Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd,introduced in January and delivered November 29, 2008,the day after he was sworn into office"
"

Some nights we feel the furred darknessof an ancient one's breath and are trappedin awakening, dismemberedby events we no longer recall.We can touch the windowsill,where October air gathersas hours slip past in thin robes,the forest a concert of voices.The last crickets let go of their songs.The land speaks, its language arisingfrom its own geography—the mountains' hulked shapesare blue whales, rememberingwhen they were undersea ridges,and rivers are serpentine strands hammered from silver, and dark treestalk to the wind—weaving mortal lives,drumbeats, pillars of smoke,voices wavering into updraft,the storyteller shifting the present.

"
"

There are too many of us for youto believe you are either alone or responsible. No woman asks for this. Some are children. Some areboys. Every one of us should havebeen heard. This is for Anna, age 17,who was then beaten and left to die;for Nathan, who at 11 admired the basketball coach; for Rosaline, whosees in her baby the face of a rapistand who finds that face difficult tolove; for sisters when soldiers came,mothers imprisoned among guards,for aunties grandmas daughters sons,for one who was tied and one who triedto scream, one whose husband watched,one violated time after time, one tornapart, who called the police whodid not call her back, who went tothe clinic where there were no kits,who numbed her shame with drugs,who could not drink enough to forget,who took her life, who believed shewas an object, who said nothing, whoknew no one was there and that no one would ever be there. Know this: thereare so many that if we could speak,our voices might spread like floodwatersover their boots and swell past securitystations; that if we cried out togetherwe might finally understand it as anassault on all people, all creation, andmaybe then there would be justice inthis war to claim yourself, a strugglemapped all over the flesh of every womanor child who has known what it is to be used, as you were, your sacred body.

"
"

All this time I've been looking for words for certain difficult womenbecause they aren't able to speak for themselves, and now theClinton Foundation has come up with a brilliant campaign—theydecided, for International Women's Day, through digital magic to erase women on the cover of Condé Nast, posters, billboards, thosefigures replaced by empty space because women have not yet achievedgender equity, as noted on a website, not-there.org, and they're right. Wehaven't. But when I read about not-there.org and saw its flashy graphics,I wasn't thinking about how women are not-there-yet, metaphorically, I just thought about women who are really not there, women and girls whokeep disappearing (not from magazines, who don't make news in Manhattan)like they've evaporated, like illusions, hundreds in Juárez, twelve hundred missing and murdered Native women across Canada. The hands of men.Now you see her. Not. Not-there. Not here, either,or anywhere. Maybe only part of the problem is the predatory perpetrator-prestidigitator who more often than not knows her, knows how to keep herquiet, who may claim to love her, even, maybe getting even—or the serialrapist-killer in the bushes who bushwhacks her in the dark. You're always safe,says the forensic psychiatrist, unless a monster happens to show up, andthen you're not. Not-there. Maybe a lonely mandible, maxilla, fibula, or ulna shows up, or a bagged body gets dragged from the river. Or not. Is this thevalue we permit a woman's life to have (or not-have) throughout a wrongworld, a global idea of her as disposable parts? In the end, this is not a xenophobic poem, not specific—it's everywhere. Not-there. Right here.Yes, the sun rises anyway, but now the parents are staring past each other, thatzero between them like a chalked outline in their family photograph. Or not.

 

"
"

What we built to hold us, the year's memory,menus and daytrips, after a whilecame loose. Those nightswe balanced on each other's mistakes,cradling our wine:twigs those branches now.Who knew what lived there?She she she called one bird.What lived there knew its place.Another bird splits its nest wide,hinges the gap with spider silk, learningto give, to give, to give until breaking. Only then—either one gives until breaking or one does not.

"
"

After a while the 500-year-old village became a secret,carved into the wall of the forest where it met the Pacific,eleven long houses and their racks of drying fish, theirdogs. No roads to this town, only boats and the memory ofboaters. Blankets made from woodpecker feathers, cattailfluff, cedar bark and dog hair woven into a plaid pattern.At least that's what I remember of the museum's diorama.When the mud came down the mountain and covered the village, no one had lived there for years. It was a boaterwho remembered, after a while, that the village was gone,and also that it had once existed. Archaeologists broughtgarden hoses to wash the mud off and hooked the hoses upto the sea. Some of what had been preserved in the mudwas destroyed that day by the water pressure, and then latermost else was ruined by the wind and rain, but at least fora few weeks they could hold the bones in their hands. Thearchaeologists brought their dogs, they lived there a while.

"
"

You’re right. I meant “midst,” not “mist.”

I don’t know what I was stinking,

I mean thinking, soap speaks intimately

to my skin every day. Most days.

Depending if darkness has risen

to my skull like smoke up a chimney floe.

Flue. Then no stepping nude

into the shower, no mist turning

the bathroom mirror into frosted glass

where my face would float

coldly in the oval. Picture a caveman

encased in ice. Good. I like how

your mind works, how your eyes

inside your mind works, and your actual eyes

reading this, their icy precision, nothing

slips by them. Even now I can feel you

hovering silently above these lines,

hawkish, Godlike, each period

a lone figure kneeling in the snow.

That’s too solemn. I would like to send

search parties and rescue choppers

to every period ever printed.

I would like to apologize to my wife

for not showering on Monday and Tuesday.

I was stinking. I was simultaneously

numb and needled with anxiety,

in the midst of a depressive episode.

Although “mist” would work too,

metaphorically speaking, in the mist of,

in the fog of, this gray haze that followed me

relentlessly from room to room

until every red bell inside my head

was wrong. Rung.

"
"

No daylight for two months, an ice chisel sliversfrozen lake water refracting blue cinders.By light of an oil lamp, a child learns to savor marrow:cracked caribou bones a heap on the floor.A sinew, thickly wrapped in soot, threads throughthe meat on her chin: a tattoo in three slender lines.One white ptarmigan plume fastened to the lip ofa birch wood basket; thaw approaches: the plume turns brown.On the edge of the open lead, a toggle-head harpoonwaits to launch: bowhead sings to krill.Thickened pack ice cracking; a baleen fishing linepulls taut a silver dorsal fin of a round white fish.A slate-blade knife slices along the grain of a caribouhindquarter; the ice cellar lined in willow branches is empty.Saltwater suffuses into a flint quarry, offshorea thin layer of radiation glazes leathered walrus skin.Alongside shatters of a hummock, a marsh marigoldflattens under three black toes of a sandhill crane.A translucent sheep horn dipper skims a freshwater stream;underneath, arctic char lay eggs of mercury.Picked before the fall migration, cloudberriesdrench in whale oil, ferment in a sealskin poke.A tundra swan nests inside a rusted steel rum;she abandons her newborns hatched a deep crimson.

"
"

Shoot in 16 mm film, capture her sitting underan olive-green archway.              Loop the sound of steel striking glass. When you blink, the camera captures the frame of her kin, walking upside down.              Loop the sound of tundra grass sprouting.Her hairline marks her shift        from caribou to woman. Standing in front of three white spotlights the silhouette of five black arrowheads departs from her lips.              Splice together her eyelashes and               frozen lids        exaggerate the strain               of her freckles coiled into song.Inukshuks tumble from the tips of her fingernails guiding the landing strip for twin otters; they watch their children travel to the moon,               or perhaps they erase our oiled webs.              Chart sixteen luminaries into the Beaufort Sea.                                            Wait.     Wait.        Wait.                             The shutter will remember                                            their white crested etchings.They resurface in the lyric of your documentary.

"
"

I’m this tiny, this statuesque, and everywherein between, and everywhere in betweenbony and overweight, my shadow cannot holdone shape in Omaha, in Tuscaloosa, in Aberdeen. My skin is mocha brown, two shades darkerthan taupe, your question is racist, nutmeg, beige,I’m not offended by your question at all.Penis or vagina? Yes and yes. Gay or straight?Both boxes. Bi, not bi, who cares, stop fixating on my sex life, Jesus never leveledhis eye to a bedroom’s keyhole. I go to churchin Tempe, in Waco, the one with the exquisite stained glass, the one with a white spirelike the tip of a Klansman’s hood. Churchescreep me out, I never step inside one,never utter hymns, Sundays I hide my flesh with camouflage and hunt. I don’t huntbut wish every deer wore a bulletproof vestand fired back. It’s cinnamon, my skin,it’s more sandstone than any color I know. I voted for Obama, McCain, Nader, I was tooapathetic to vote, too lazy to walk one block,two blocks to the voting booth For or against a women’s right to choose? Yes, for and against.For waterboarding, for strapping detainees with snorkels and diving masks. Against burningfossil fuels, let’s punish all those smokestacksfor eating the ozone, bring the wrecking balls, but build more smokestacks, we need jobshere in Harrisburg, here in Kalamazoo. Againstgun control, for cotton bullets, for constructing a better fence along the border, let’s raise concrete toward the sky, why does it needall that space to begin with? For creatingholes in the fence, adding ladders, they’re nothere to steal work from us, no one dreamsof crab walking for hours across a lettuce fieldso someone could order the Caesar salad. No one dreams of sliding a squeegee downthe cloud-mirrored windows of a high-rise, but some of us do it. Some of us sell flowers. Some of us cut hair. Some of us carefullysteer a mower around the cemetery grounds.Some of us paint houses. Some of us monitor the power grid. Some of us ring you up while some of us crisscross a parking lotto gather the shopping carts into one long,rolling, clamorous and glittering backbone. 

"
"

We the people, we the one

times 320 million, I’m rounding up, there’s really

too many grass blades to count,

wheat plants to tally, just see

the whole field swaying from here to that shy

blue mountain. Swaying

as in rocking, but also the other

definition of the verb: we sway, we influence,

we impress. Unless we’re asleep,

the field’s asleep, more a postcard

than a real field, portrait of the people

unmoved. You know that shooting last week?

I will admit the number dead

was too low to startle me

if you admit you felt the same,

and the person standing by you

agrees, and the person beside that person.

It has to be double digits,

don’t you think? To really

shake up your afternoon? I’m troubled by

how untroubled I felt, my mind’s humdrum

regarding the total coffins, five

if you care to know, five still

even if you don’t. I’m angry

I’m getting used to it, the daily

gunned down, pop-pop on Wednesday,

Thursday’s spent casings

pinging on the sidewalk. It all sounds

so industrial, there’s nothing metal

that won’t make a noise, I’m thinking every gun

should come with a microphone,

each street with loudspeakers

to broadcast their banging.

We would never sleep, the field

always awake, acres of swaying

up to that shy blue mountain, no wonder

why it cowers on the horizon, I mean

look at us, look with the mountain’s eyes

we the people

putting holes in the people.

"
"

Look who’s whistling through bleached teeth now,

one hand on svelte hip, one fist pumping the air–

Pittsburgh–once that madcap & zany joke factory

 

now chosen for her fetching comeback tale

& her earth-sheltered welcome center

& her Warhol & her Tropical Forest Conservatory

 

& her Rosemont, working farm of the moguls

of ketchup. Rarely since the global credit crisis

do Pittsburghers cross bridges or rivers or the thresholds

 

of stunningly profitable ventures. Yet tonight,

as global output contracts at a pace not seen since

the 1930s, as the French president proposes reform

 

of the International Monetary Fund & the US

president delights in the local crepes with crispy edges,

& as Greenpeace commandos drape a WHAT THE FUCK?

 

banner from the deck of the West End Bridge

(above which Chinook & Black Hawk helicopter hover),

& as police use the LRAD sound cannon on protesters

for the first time in the United States or Canada–

 

a Pittsburgh Pirate homers into the Allegheny River

& sets the esplanade ablaze with the flash

& fizzle of fireworks launched at the flat lozenge

 

of the moon, a ghostly azure, suspended low

above the sweep of the cantilevered roofs

on the opposite shoreline–the poured concrete,

 

the glass towers, the obelisks–a costly parody

of bygone days when confidence in the future, evinced

by our sixty miles of integrated mills, was illustrated

 

by a time capsule, a chamber “hermetically” sealed

in Steel City alloys, bicentennially filled with newsprint

& artifacts of 1958 Pittsburgh to be cracked open

 

& savored in some distant epoch, an idea first

embraced by Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib, king

of Assyria, Babylonia, & Egypt, & reenacted now

 

in waves of sound & light–the roar of fireworks night

for a losing franchise, the hoarse voices of Pittsburghers–

wafting into the void, accelerated by Jupiter’s pull,

 

& then hurled by Jupiter out of the solar system,

yet another urban missive from a noisy planet,

a comingling of mathematics and human music, charming

 

& powerful, a murmur preserved of our city-state

that once flourished–before its citizens dispersed

to other lands, to greater deeds on the blue Earth.

"
"

My father was four years in the war,

and afterward, according to my mother,

had nothing to say. She says he trembled

in his sleep the next four years.

My father was twice the father of sons

miscarried, and afterward said nothing.

My mother keeps this silence also.

Four times my father was on strike,

and according to my mother; had nothing

to say. She says the company didn’t understand,

nor can her son, the meaning

of an extra fifteen cents an hour in 1956

to a man tending a glass furnace in August.

 

I have always remembered him a tired man.

I have respected him like a guest

and expected nothing.

It is April now.

My life lies before me,

enticing as the woman at my side.

Now, in April, I want him to speak.

I want to stand against the worn body

of his pain. I want to try it on

like a coat that does not fit.

"
"

Someone is looking for us.

I sensed it earlier at the creek

while floating on my back, and again

on Route 8 near Brookline.

So we’ve detoured to this hillside

eroding and crazy with markers.

We’re looking for row mm or nn

or something like that.

I lug the baby; my wife runs ahead.

This neighborhood knows her–

she passes so easily between stones.

She finds the grave, her father

dead ten years now. In the time it takes

to say kaddish the sun’s dropped.

I set down my son

and he crawls in the dimness,

pulling himself up on the headstone.

How delicately he fingers the marble.

Quickly he rounds its corner. Vanishes.

I’m thinking: grass, stone, quiet–

then babbling from another world.

"
"

Does my little son miss the smell

of his first mother? I wonder

as the mewl of his mouth

opens toward a plastic bottle

that is not her breast.

 

Sudden new mother,

I bury my nose deep

into his skullcap of ringlets,

his starry cheesiness.

 

In her good-bye letter to him

sealed in his album

with a birth certificate, which now

list my name as Mother,

 

his first mother writes

she nursed him briefly

after he emerged into

the second room of his world.

 

I think of milk, volcanic

and insistent, answering

the newborn’s gigantic thirst,

a primal agreement between

generosity and greed.

 

Sometimes I press my nose

to the glass of that place

where a mother and my child

belong to each other;

I cannot imagine coming

between them.

 

But then I want to lick him all over

with a cow’s thick tongue,

to taste him and mark him as mine

so if the other mother returns,

she will refuse her handled calf

smeared with my smell.

 

"
"

The bus steps are high, but William clambers up gamely.

Doors shut. He peers out a print-marked window.

From the street corner, I wave, wistful as a soldier’s bride

as his bus pulls away and turns a corner.

 

At noon the yellow bus returns him

to the same place where I’m standing again.

He thinks I stood there all day, waiting in his absence.

When he finds out I left to play tennis,

 

his forehead crumples like paper in a wastebasket.

Now he knows I can move on my own without him.

Tears drawn from the well of desertion form in his eyes.

I’m his first love and his greatest disappointment.

"
"

The Roman candle of a yard light

caramelizes the old snow.

The glow trespasses the dark hold

of December, dimming the view

 

of the night sky with its winter

triangle a boy strains to see

through the haze, as he lets his jacket

hang open, unzipped to the cold.

 

He knows to return through

the black cleft between buildings,

below electric wires that seem

to carry a little train of snow

 

on their slim rails, where he throws

the switch that shuts off the bulb

on its pole, that opens the dome

to a blast of stars in outer space,

 

to the pinpoint of Jupiter,

to the constellation of Orion hunting

the Great Bear that the boy follows

to find a smudge of gray–he can gaze

 

through that peep hole to another

galaxy also spangled with radiance

from stars that traveled two

and a half million light years

 

before appearing as a signal

in the rod cells of his eyes

that pass impulses through

neurons and nerves

 

to his brain that creates images.

He draws in a sharp breath,

the high voltage power box

of his chest hot and humming.

 

"
"

Once again, someone falls in their first falling–fall of two bodies, of two eyes, of four green eyes or eight green eyes if we count those born in the mirror (at midnight, in the purest fear, in the loss), you haven’t been able to recognize the voice of your dull silence, to see the earthly messages scrawled in the middle of one mad state, when the body is a glass and from ourselves and from the other we drink some kind of impossible water.


         Desire needlessly spills on me a cursed liqueur. For my thirsty thirst, what can the promise of eyes do? I speak of something not in this world. I speak of someone whose purpose is elsewhere.


         And I was naked in memory of the white night. Drunk and I made love all night, just like a sick dog.


         Sometimes we suffer too much reality in the space of a single night. We get undressed, we’re horrified. We’re aware the mirror sounds like a watch, the mirror from which your cry will pour out, your laceration.


         Night opens itself only once. It’s enough. You see. You’ve seen. Fear of being two in the mirror, and suddenly we’re four. We cry, we moan, my fear, my joy more horrible than my fear, my visceral words, my words are keys that lock me into a mirror, with you, but ever alone. And I am well aware what night is made of. We’ve fallen so completely into jaws that didn’t expect this sacrifice, this condemnation of my eyes which have seen. I speak of a discovery: felt the I in sex, sex in the I. I speak of burying everyday fear to secure the fear of an instant. The purest loss. But who’ll say: you don’t cry anymore at night? Because madness is also a lie. Like night. Like death.


 

"
"

My hands hold, my father’s older the wires–

picture rolls once, then steadies… an English castle!

A voice-over drones about Edward I,

who, to subdue the Welsh, built castles.

Some sixty years, dozens of engineers, the masses

conscripted from the villages.

 

My father moves on to a Zenith

with a bad tuner. TVs interest him, not English

with their damp, historical programming.

 

                                                         *    *   *

 

Here there were Indians, mound builders.

Here, an English fort, a few farmers.

And here the industrialist settled his ass,

John Ford on the river dredging sand

for making glass. Plate glass.

(Why should America buy from Europe?)

Some half dozen years, German engineers, and hundreds of Slavic peasants.

 

Grandfather sat on his samovar

warming himself and making excuses,

but finally, he set off.

Got a room, became a shoveler.

Got a wife, a company house.

Ford City: a valley filling with properties.

 

No one got along–

Not Labor and Capital, not Germans and Slavs,

not husband and wives, for that matter.

 

                                                        *    *   *

 

Edward’s castles were ruins

by the fifteenth century. Not from Welsh armies,

but the rise of the middle class.

The towns around a castle thrived:

tailors, smithies, cobblers, coopers.

Drawing in the Welsh peasants.

And what with intermarriage and the rise of capitalism…

a castle grew obsolescent.

 

I turn off the set. My father hunts

cigarettes at the Kwik-Mart on the corner.

Overhead, my mother’s footsteps,

the tonk of bottles,

the scraping of plates.

 

                                                       *    *   *

 

During Eisenhower’s reign

my grandfather retired and mowed his lawn

until I took over. He primed the filter,

set the choke, then we took turns pulling

till the sputtering engine caught.

(“Somanabitch,” he spit)

And watched me as I mowed

back and forth for two dollars.

 

Once in the garage he showed me a scythe.

He mowed hay in the old country, and the women

would follow, raking it in windrows.

 

                                                        *    *   *

The factories today are mostly closed down,

or full of robots or far off in Asia.

Ford City lives through the mail:

compensation, a thin pension,

and, of course, Social Security.

 

I always drive along the factory, windows rolled down;

I want my kids in the back seat to see.

Seven or eight, probably pensioners, congregate

on the corner, each man dressed quite alike:

Sears jacket, cigarette, salt-and-pepper hair.

 

“Honk the horn,” my oldest begs.

He waves and waves zealously

until a man turns–a man

with my face, but full of sweetness now,

silence and clarity.

"
"

All night I hear the noise of water sobbing. All night I make night in me, I make the day that begins on my account, that sobs because day falls like water through night.

         All night I hear the voice of someone seeking me out. All night you abandon me slowly like the water that sobs slowly falling. All night I write luminous messages, messages of rain, all night someone checks for me and I check for someone.

         The noise of steps in the circle near this choleric light birthed from my insomnia. Steps of someone who no longer writhes, who no longer writes. All night someone holds back, then crosses the circle of bitter light.

         All night I drown in your eyes become my eyes. All night I prod myself on toward that squatter in the circle of my silence. All night I see something lurch toward my looking, something humid, contrived of silence launching the sound of someone sobbing.

         Absence blows grayly and night goes dense. Night, the shade of the eyelids of the dead, viscous night, exhaling some black oil that blows me forward and prompts me to search out an empty space without warmth, without cold. All night I flee from someone. I lead the chase, I lead the fugue. I sing a song of mourning. Black birds over black shrouds. My brain cries. Demented wind. I leave the tense and strained hand, I don’t want to know anything but this perpetual wailing, this clatter in the night, this delay, this infamy, this pursuit, this inexistence.

         All night I see that abandonment is me, that the sole sobbing voice is me. We can search with lanterns, cross the shadow’s lie. We can feel the heart thud in the thigh and water subside in the archaic site of the heart.

         All night I ask you why. All night you tell me no.

 

"
"

The wall of identical boxes into which

our Aunt Sticky sorted the daily mail

was at the far end of her dining room,

and from the private side looked like

a fancy wallpaper upon which peonies

pushed through a white wooden trellis,

or sometimes like crates of chickens

stacked all the way to the ceiling.

I'd learned by then – I was a little boy –

that a thing can look like one thing

on one day and another on another,

depending on how you might be feeling.

There were times when we were there,

having our coffee and sweet rolls,

when some woman on the lobby side

would with a click unlock her box

and leaning down, peer inside to see

if she had mail, and see us at the table,

Mother and Father, my sister and I

and our postmistress aunt, and call out,

""Yoohoo, Sticky! I see you have company!""

and waggle her fingers, waving hello.

 

"
"

After a funeral, they were covered with black cloth,

some draped with shawls like a scalloped valance.

Leftover sewing scraps, wool, linen, synthetic,

anything to shroud the odd-shaped mirrors,

though sometimes a corner was exposed like a woman

whose ankle peeks forbidden from under a long skirt.

 

A mourner must shun vanity during shiva, focusing inward

but as a child I wondered if this were to avoid ghosts,

for don't the dead take their time leaving?

I'm of a generation where grandparents disappeared,

great aunts with European accents,

rarely an explanation provided to us children.

 

My mother died too young.

With a baby in arms I couldn't bear to fling

that dark cloth over the glass.

After all she had come back from the dead so often,

even the doctors could not explain it.

Each time I looked in a mirror my mother gazed back.

I could never tell if she were trying to tell me something

or to take the baby with her.

 

"
"

In the evening she comes to me

like a child ready for bed.

She slips under covers, curls

into my curves or stretches against

my spine. Some have said they fear

I might crush her, but we're a tender

pair, each aware of the warmth

and the other.

 

I knew a woman once who kept

an orphaned antelope, let it

roam her kitchen, sleep in her bed,

musky scent and hooves.

 

This dog looks like a small deer,

poised and silent in the lawn,

but at night, she is a dark body, lean

and long against the lavender cotton

of my summer sleeping. We are bone

and bone, muscle and muscle,

and underneath each surface

a quiet and insistent pulse.

"
"

The ground cracked

like the rough pit of a peach

and snapped in two.

The sun behind the mountains

turned into an olive-green glow.

 

To niña Gloria this was home.

She continued to sell her bowl of lemons,

rubbing a cold, thin silver Christ

pocketed in her apron. Others

like Lito and Marvin played

soldiers in the ruins of a school,

running around mounds of bricks,

          shooting chickens and pigs.

 

No one knows exactly how

a light film of ash appeared

on everyone’s eyelids

          early in the morning

or how trout and mackerel plunged from the sky,

twitched, leaped through the streets.

 

Some say the skin of trees

felt like old newspaper, dry and yellow.

Others believe the soapsuds

washed aside in rivers

began to rise in their milk.

 

One Monday morning, a rain fell

and the cemetery washed into the city.

Bones began to knock

              and knock at our doors.

Streets became muddy rivers

waiting for bodies to drop

              among piles of dead fish.

 

In a year, everyone stabbed flowers on a grave.

 

This explains why women thought

and moved like lizards under stones,

why men heard bees buzzing inside their skulls,

why dogs lost their sense of smell

sniffing piles of rubble to get back home.

 

In a few years, no one cared

about turtles banging their heads against rocks,

bulls with their sad, busted eyes,

parrots that kept diving into creeks,

the dark swelling of the open ground

              or at night a knife

              stained the kitchen cloth.

 

Instead, niña Gloria swept the ground,

the broom licking her feet at each stroke.

 

At the bus station, Marvin shined

military boots,

              twenty-five cents a pair,

reduced his words to a spit, a splutter

of broken sentences

             on shoe polish, leather.

 

In the evenings, he counted coins

he’d tossed in a jar, then walked home,

one step closer to the cracked bone

clenched in the yellow jaw of a dog.

"
"

As I punch the time-clock, I know

men will be gunned down at dawn

in a distant continent, someone

will dart into a café with a bomb nestled

 

in the belly, by the roadside a woman

will moan over the body of a man,

shrunken, stretched on the earth, that God

will finger the forehead of a dying country,

 

all of it funneled through the news on TV.

But tonight, instead of tuning in, I’m going to kneel

beside the window, recognize myself

in the croak of the crow, high above the black tree

 

of winter, claws hooked and rough, wings swept

back and hunched, face masked with exhaust.

I’m going to try, even if I fail, to see myself whole,

complete in the cry, in the beak of the crow.

"
"

On the Pan American Highway, somewhere

between the north and south continent,

you come across a chain of volcanoes,

 

a coast with a thick growth of palm trees,

crunching waves of the sea; an isthmus

Neruda called “slender earth like a whip.”

 

When the road bends, turns into a street,

the walls splattered with “Yanqui Go Home!!!”

you see a boy fifteen years old,

 

barefoot, sniffing glue in a small plastic bag.

An old woman in an apron will step out,

say, “This is the right street.”

 

In the public square, there will be no friend

from school to welcome you, no drive

to Sonsonate, city of coconuts,

 

no one to order cold Pilseners, oyster

cocktails, or convince the waitress

into dancing a cumbia or two with you.

 

Instead, at the local bar, you’ll raise

a bottle next to strangers, stub

your cigarette out on the floor.

 

You’ll watch a country ten years

after the civil war: an old man sitting

on the curb, head between knees,

 

open hand stretched out.

Everything will hurt, your hair,

your toenails, even your shoes.

 

You’ll curse dusty streets, demented

sun slowly burning the nape of your neck,

stray dogs following you to the park.

 

By nightfall, you drag yourself back to the bars,

looking for a lost country in a shot of Tíc Táck.

Against the wall, three men with their guitars.

 

When you lie on a hotel bed,

too tired to sleep, when you feel torn,

twisted like an old newspaper, blown

 

from city to city, you have reached the place.

You have begun to speak like a man

by the side of the road, barefoot.

"
"

After seven lean years

we are promised seven fat ones,

if the cows do not die first.

Some care must be taken

to prevent their demise

in the scrub

or the slaughterhouse.

There must be enough bones

to throw and to bury.

 

The skull of a cow,

I put it on.

There are many strewn in the field,

there has not been much rain.

I look through the eyes,

that is, my eyes replace the eyes

that death has taken.

I can see out or through.

It is not a bad fate

to be a cow,

to be, at once,

so awkward,

so full of grace,

so full of milk.

 

Everywhere the udders are full,

the teats are ready,

the mouth of the calf is soft and deep.

I would thrust my hand in it

for the wet joy of being so used.

 

My own breasts are marked

from the time the milk came in too fast;

 

I did not have time to grow

to the moment of giving.

It is fitting

that beauty

leaves such scars.

 

Milk has passed through my fingers,

has spurted through my fingers,

but not once

during these seven lean years.

"
"

This is the silence around the poem of the death of my father.

This is the silence before the poem.

 

While my father was dying, the Challenger was exploding on TV

Again and again. I watched it happen. In his hospital room,

I followed his breath. Then it stopped.

 

This is the silence in a poem about the dying of the father.

 

 

We’re burning the earth. We’re burning the sky.

 

Here is another silence in the middle of the poem about the immolation of the Fathers.

 

The pyres of bodies in Saigon.

The burned air

The charred limbs.

Ash.

Rancid flames.

Heat

Light

Fire

 

                                  We turn away.

 

Here is another silence within the poem about the burial of the fire.

 

When my father died, the rains poured down the moment I picked up the shovel of earth.

I staggered under the weight of the water.

 

Another silence please.

 

 

I have always wanted to be a woman of fire.

I will have to learn how to rain.

Gently, I will learn how to rain.

 

I have set fire to your green fields,

May I be water to your burning lands.

 

Please join me in this last silence at the end of the poem of fire.

"
"

Everything dies. Without you

I saw one million flamingos

 

ignite a lake in Africa.

The same darkness

 

descended everywhere.

When you dropped your body,

 

I hoped you would tremble

for the beak of God.

 

Why did we wash you three times

tearing off the girl’s white dress

 

to swaddle you in an austere shroud?

Some say, dying, not death, teaches.

 

You gained nothing

from that reduction.

 

Months in the narrow foxhole of disease–

you dug it; we filled it in.

 

My father is thin as you were

in his hospital bed,

 

both of you let everything go,

care for nothing

 

except that barbed hook–

life.

 

It grabbed you like a thorn

until you begged me, “Pull it out.”

"
"

I wanted to have a poem and I was pregnant. I was very thin. As if I’d lived on air. A poet must be able to live on air, but a mother must not attempt it. My mother wanted me to buy a set of matching pots, Wearever aluminum, like the ones she had. They were heavy and had well fitting lids so my suppers wouldn’t burn. My husband wanted me to give dinner parties. John F. Kennedy was running for office.


 


I sensed danger. Kennedy wasn’t against the Bomb or for nuclear disarmament. I joined SANE at its inception. Also Concerned Scientists. I spoke with Linus Pauling and encouraged my husband to help his partner organize Physicians for Social Responsibility.


 


There was a baby in my belly. I wanted to write poems. I had a crazy idea that a woman could write a real novel, the kind that shook the world. I hallucinated that a woman could be a poet, but she would have to be free. I couldn’t imagine that freedom for myself even though I could see it in Isla Negra when I followed Pablo Neruda. I could see it in the way he walked. Even if he were walking inside a dictatorship, among guns, soldiers and spies, there was nothing between him and his vision. Anything he saw, he was able to take into himself–there was no sight, no image, no vision to which he didn’t feel entitled. In his heart, everything–everything–belonged to him. Pablo Neruda was–more than anything–a poet, and so he was an entitled man.


 


I was a woman and entitled to nothing. I had nothing except a husband, a rented house, a set of pots, living room furniture, a frenzy of obligations, credit cards, anxious relatives, too many acquaintances, a gift of future diaper service, two telephones, no time to read, a plastic wrapped cookbook of recipes gleaned from the pages of the New York Times, and a hunger, a terrible hunger for the unimaginable, unlimited freedom of being a poet, and a baby in my belly.


 


I would have called Pablo long distance if I had the courage, if I had the ability to speak Spanish fluently, if we had ever talked about real things. But, what would a man know about a baby in the belly? And what did it matter if there were to be one poet more or less in the world when so many in his country were dying?


 


I woke up one morning and thought–I can’t have this child. My husband said, “You’ll have to get a job after it’s born so we can buy a house. You’ll need an advanced degree so you can do something.” I thought, I can’t. I have to write poems. My mother found a crib. Someone painted it white. A friend sent a pastel mobile with tame wood animals. I thought about blue curtains, making bedspreads, and abortions.


 


Pablo was silent. He was walking so far from me, I couldn’t hear him. My husband objected to donating more free medical care to the Black Panthers. I tried to make dolmades from scratch and located grape leaves preserved in brine at the Boys’ Market twenty miles away. I organized a write-in campaign for peace to challenge JFK. My husband thought it would be nice to have teatime with the children and romantic dinners by ourselves. The new formula bottles lined up on the sink like tiny bombs. The U.S. was pursuing over ground testing; I was afraid the radiation would cross the milk barrier. I had a poem in me howling for real life but no language to write in. The fog came in thick, flapping about my feet like blankets unraveling. I became afraid to have a daughter.


 


I called Pablo Neruda in the middle of the night as he walked underwater by Isla Negra. He moved like a dream porpoise. He seemed pregnant with words. They came out of his penis in long miraculous strings. The sea creatures quivered with joy. I said, “Pablo, I want to know how to bear the child in my belly onto this bed of uranium and I want to know if a woman can a be a poet.” He was large as a whale. He drank the sea and spouted it in glistening odes, black and shiny. I said, “I can’t have this child,” and he laughed as if he had never done anything but carry and birth children.


 


So I packed my little bag as if I were going to the hospital and I left a note and the Wearever pots and sterilized nipples upon the glass missiles, and took the cradle board than an American Indian friend had given me for the baby and that had made my husband snort– “You’re not going to carry the thing on your back, are you?” I took some money, the car, some books, paper and pens, my walking shoes, an unwieldly IBM electric typewriter, my pregnant belly and a dozen cloth diapers, and I went out.


 


I knew how to carry a baby and how to carry a poem and I would learn how to have a baby and even how to have a poem. I would have enough milk for both. I would learn how to walk with them. But I didn’t know, and I didn’t want to know, how to have a husband and a matched set of Wearever pots.

"
"

We were made to understand it would be

Terrible. Every small want, every niggling urge,

Every hate swollen to a kind of epic wind. 

 

Livid, the land, and ravaged, like a rageful 

Dream. The worst in us having taken over 

And broken the rest utterly down. 

 

                                                                 A long age 

Passed. When at last we knew how little 

Would survive us—how little we had mended 

 

Or built that was not now lost—something 

Large and old awoke. And then our singing 

Brought on a different manner of weather. 

 

Then animals long believed gone crept down 

From trees. We took new stock of one another. 

We wept to be reminded of such color. 

 

"
"

In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In

the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.

 

Who have taught us. Who have guided us. Who have sustained us. Who

have healed us.

 

Please heal the animals.

 

In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In

the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.

 

Whom we have slaughtered. Whom we have feared. Whom we have

caged. Whom we have persecuted. Whom we have slandered. Whom

we have cursed. Whom we have tortured.

 

Protect the animals.

 

In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In

the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.

 

Whose habitat we have stolen. Whose territory we have plundered.

Whose feeding grounds we have paved and netted. Whose domain we

have poisoned. Whose food we have eaten. Whose young we have killed.

Whose lives and ways of life we threaten.

 

Restore the animals.

 

In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In

the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.

 

Forgive us. Have mercy. May the animals return. Not as a resurrection

but as living beings. Here. On earth. On this earth that is also theirs.

 

Oh Great Spirit. Heal the animals. Protect the animals. Restore the

animals.

 

Our lives will also be healed. Our souls will be protected. Our

spirits will be restored.

 

Oh Spirit of Raven. Oh Spirit of Wolf. Oh Spirit of Whale. Oh Spirit of

Elephant. Oh Spirit of Snake.

 

Teach us, again, how to live.

"
"

What a profound longing

I feel, just this very instant,

For the Garden of Eden

On Montague Street

Where I seldom shopped,

Usually only after therapy

Elbow sore at the crook

From a handbasket filled

To capacity. The glossy pastries!

Pomegranate, persimmon, quince!

Once, a bag of black beluga

Lentils spilt a trail behind me

While I labored to find

A tea they refused to carry.

It was Brooklyn. My thirties.

Everyone I knew was living

The same desolate luxury,

Each ashamed of the same things:

Innocence and privacy. I'd lug

Home the paper bags, doing

Bank-balance math and counting days.

I'd squint into it, or close my eyes

And let it slam me in the face—

The known sun setting

On the dawning century.

"
"







for the Geechee Gullah Ring Shouters







One of the women greeted me.

I love you, she said. She didn't

Know me, but I believed her,

And a terrible new ache

Rolled over in my chest,

Like in a room where the drapes

Have been swept back. I love you,

I love you, as she continued

Down the hall past other strangers,

Each feeling pierced suddenly

By pillars of heavy light.

I love you, throughout

The performance, in every

Handclap, every stomp.

I love you in the rusted iron

Chains someone was made

To drag until love let them be

Unclasped and left empty

In the center of the ring.

I love you in the water

Where they pretended to wade,

Singing that old blood-deep song

That dragged us to those banks

And cast us in. I love you,

The angles of it scraping at

Each throat, shouldering past

The swirling dust motes

In those beams of light

That whatever we now knew

We could let ourselves feel, knew

To climb. O Woods—O Dogs—                       

O Tree—O Gun—O Girl, run—

O Miraculous Many Gone—

O Lord—O Lord—O Lord—

Is this love the trouble you promised?

"
"

He has 

               sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people

 He has plundered our—

                                            ravaged our—

                                                                          destroyed the lives of our—

 taking away our­—                                  abolishing our most valuable—and altering fundamentally the Forms of our—In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned forRedress in the most humble terms:

 

                                                                Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.

 We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigrationand settlement here.

 

                                    —taken Captive

                                              

                                                                    on the high Seas

                                                                                                      to bear—

 

"
"

Why and by whose power were you sent?

What do you see that you may wish to steal?

Why this dancing? Why do your dark bodies

Drink up all the light? What are you demanding

That we feel? Have you stolen something? Then

What is that leaping in your chest? What is

The nature of your mission? Do you seek

To offer a confession? Have you anything to do

With others brought by us to harm? Then

Why are you afraid? And why do you invade

Our night, hands raised, eyes wide, mute

As ghosts? Is there something you wish to confess?

Is this some enigmatic type of test? What if we

Fail? How and to whom do we address our appeal?

"
"

What woke to war in me those years

When my daughter had first grown into

A solid self-centered self? I’d watch her

Sit at the table—well, not quite sit,

More like stand on one leg while

The other knee hovered just over the chair.

She wouldn't lower herself, as if

There might be a fire, or a great black

Blizzard of waves let loose in the kitchen,

And she'd need to make her escape. No,

She'd trust no one but herself, her own

New lean always jittering legs to carry her—

Where exactly? Where would a child go?

To there. There alone. She'd rest one elbow

On the table—the opposite one to the bent leg

Skimming the solid expensive tasteful chair.

And even though we were together, her eyes

Would go half-dome, shades dropped

Like a screen at some cinema the old aren't

Let into. I thought I'd have more time! I thought

My body would have taken longer going

About the inevitable feat of repelling her,

But now, I could see even in what food

She left untouched, food I'd bought and made

And all but ferried to her lips, I could see

How it smacked of all that had grown slack

And loose in me. Her other arm

Would wave the fork around just above

The surface of the plate, casting about

For the least possible morsel, the tiniest

Grain of unseasoned rice. She'd dip

Into the food like one of those shoddy

Metal claws poised over a valley of rubber

Bouncing balls, the kind that lifts nothing

Or next to nothing and drops it in the chute.

The narrow untouched hips. The shoulders

Still so naïve as to stand squared, erect,

Impervious facing the window open

Onto the darkening dusk.

"
"

If you don't get too close to people you can't disappoint them,

which would be so much worse

than letting them disappoint you.

 

To the extent that you gain

a perch that means other people look up to you,

to just that extent you can never

tell them how you feel.

 

You can warble, or

follow a siren, or a Shenandoah

vireo, into the shade, or take

advice from the lights: be

a child, or be like a child.

You will want for nothing, and you will never be heard.

"
"

What will survive us

has already begun

 

Oak galls

Two termites’ curious

self-perpetuating bodies

 

Letting the light through the gaps

 

They lay out their allegiances

under the roots

of an overturned tree

 

Almost always better

to build than to wreck

 

You can build in a wreck

 

Under the roots

of an overturned tree

 

Consider the martin that hefts

herself over traffic cones

 

Consider her shadow

misaligned

over parking-lot cement

Saran Wrap scrap in her beak

 

Nothing lasts

forever not even

the future we want

 

The President has never

owned the rain

"
"

I can remember when I wanted X

more than anything ever—for X fill in

from your own childhood

 

[balloon, pencil lead, trading card, shoelaces, a bow

or not to have to wear a bow]

 

and now I am moved to action, when I am moved,

principally by a memory of what to want.

 

The point is to be, in your own eyes, what you are,

 

or to keep your own tools, so that you can pretend.

 

And so it was no surprise,

to me at least, when Cooper, who is two,

collapsed in fortissimo fits when he could not have

a $20, three-foot-long stuffed frog

in the image of Frog from Frog and Toad, since he is Toad.

 

That morning, needing a nap,

he had thrown, from the third-story balcony

of Miller's Cafe and Bakery, into the whistling

rapids and shallows

of the Ammonoosuc River, with its arrowheads and caravans of stones,

his Red Sox cap. His hair was shining like

another planet's second sun,

as he explained, looking up, ""I threw my hat in the river.

I would like my hat back now.""

"
"

                                                1

 

I made myself. Mommy and Daddy were proud, in that order.

I didn’t mail myself like a letter some other kids

already knew. I learned to use stamps. They stuck to my thumb

without any glue. I didn’t have any permission.

                                                 2

 

There was a snowstorm that lasted three days

and a cavern of monochrome memory. There were board games, and a

      pencil-and-paper game

where the object was to figure out the object of the game.

There was a stack of broad-rule writing paper, and a stapled calendar,

and a 64-pack of sparkly rainbow crayons, to make each week look different

since they all started out black and white, and all the same.

                                                 3

 

O grapefruit (as color and flavor). O never quite rightly tied laces. O look,

up there on the uneven climbing bars,

too hot to touch where the sun touches, now that it’s spring,

 

the shadow of a tarp, like a sail between sailors

and thin swings that make no decision, like weathervanes.

 

O think of the lost Chuck Taylors. The lost Mary Janes.

"
"

The Inside Out Mermaid is fine with letting it all hang out–veins, muscles, the bits of fat at her belly, her small gray spleen. At first her lover loves it–with her organs on the outside, she's the ultimate open book. He can pump her lungs like two bellows and make her gasp; ask her difficult questions and study the synapses firing in her brain as she answers to see if she's lying; poke a pleasure center in the frontal lobe and watch her squirm. No need for bouquets or sad stories about his childhood. He just plucks a pulmonary vein and watches the left ventricle flounder. But before long, she starts to sense that her lover, like all the others before him, is getting restless. This is when she starts showing them her collections–the basket of keys from all over the world, the box of zippers with teeth of every imaginable size–all chosen to convey a sense of openness. As a last resort, she’ll even read out loud the entries from her diary about him to him. But eventually he’ll become convinced she’s hiding things from him and she is. Her perfect skin. Her long black hair. Her red mouth, never chapped from exposure to sun or wind, how she secretly loves that he can’t touch her here or here.


 

"
"

When my hole-punch drizzles tiny paper circles onto the carpet, my wolf sister moans and bites it, covering her ears with her paws. I think she’s tired of the moon. She takes a stack of dinner plates from my cupboard and slinks off to the park to break them. Our brother shows up a week later, collapses on the sofa like a fur throw. Why have they come here when everything I do is wrong? They howl in the shower together but the water doesn’t mask the sound. I go in afterwards with paper towels to mop the droplets–I know there’ll be water all over–but the room is bone dry. Maybe this time things will be different. I hide the home movies in case they ask for them. In the one I always watch, there’s some wobbly footage of the sky, then my father lowers the camera’s eye to mother teaching my sister and brother to “tell time.” They’re following a mother hare on her sunset rounds–one leveret mouthful at 12 o’clock, another at 3, 6, 9. Then the camera zooms in on me–I’ve spat out my pacifier made of fur and I’m on the porch surrounded by bonsai trees, killing or saving Barbie.


 

"
"

Sunday, awake with this headache. I pull apart the evening with a fork. White

clot behind the eyes.

 

 

Someone once told me, before and after is just another false binary. The

warmed-over bones of January. I had no passport. Beneath the stove, two mice

made a paradise out of a button of peanut butter.

 

 

Suffering operates by its own logic. Its gropings and reversals. Ample, in ways

that are exquisite. And how it leaves—not unlike how it arrives, without clear

notice.

 

 

These days, I've had my fill of Chinatown and its wet markets. Gutted fish.

Overcooked chattering. The stench making me look hard at everything.

 

 

Summer mornings before the heat has moved in. Joy has been buried in me

overnight, but builds in the early hours. My attention elastic.

 

 

The babbling streets of Causeway Bay, out of which the sharp taste of the city

emerges. Nothing can stay dry here. The dark cherries of eyes come and go,

as they please.

 

 

Let there be no more braiding of words. I want a spare mouth.

 

 

My father taught me wherever you are, always be looking for a way out: this

opening or that one. Or a question. Sharp enough to slice a hole for you to slip

through.

 

 

Long car trips where I sat in the back of our family's used Nissan. The stale

odor of plush seats and sun-warmed cola. My parents' and my words do not

touch. I grow adept at tunneling inward, a habit I have yet to let go of.

 

 

I am protective of what eyes cannot pry open. The unannounced. The infinite

places within language to hide.

 

 

A Zen priest once told me that without snagging on a storyline, the body can

only take loss for ninety seconds. The physical body has its limits, is what I

heard. The imagination can break through them.

 

 

Boiled peanuts. Leather of daybreak. Cotton thinning out into thread. Dried

vomit. Ice water from the spigot. The sacred and profane share a border. In the

desert, small droppings of unknown origin.

 

 

Even when I was young, I loved peering at faces in films. The pleasure of

watching and of not being watched.

 

 

Black koi fish open their mouths at the skin of the pond for oxygen. At the edge

of the water, I hold two lines from Ikkyū in my mouth. Make my way slowly.

 

 

Nights when I shared a bed in a small room. Another’s body to the left, hooked

by a heavy dream.

 

 

Funny, the way we come to understand a place by wanting to escape it.

 

 

I can shake out the imprint of my body on the sheets each morning. But the

mind–the mind is a different matter.

 

 

When I was four, I ate spoonfuls of powdered milk straight from the canis-

ter. The powder was sweet. There wasn't enough money for fresh milk. Seven

hundred years ago, Chang Yang-hao wrote, All my life seems / like yesterday morning. 

 

"
"

 I.

 

The face of Chinatown returns its color,

plucked from July's industrial steamer.

 Dry the cup!

So we do.

 

Four noodle shops on East Broadway release their belches collectively.

They breed in me a hankering for family life.

 

Here, there's no logic to melons and spring onions exchanging hands.

No rhythm to men's briefs clothes-pinned to the fire escape.

 

Retirees beneath the Manhattan Bridge leak hearsay.

 

The woman in Apartment #18 on Bayard washes her feet in pot of boiled

water each evening before bedtime. But every handful of weeks she lapses.

 

I lean into the throat of summer.

 

Perched above these streets with whom I share verbs and adjectives.

 

II.

 

Faces knotted, bangs softened with grease.

The East River pulls along a thread of sun.

 

While Sunday slides in. Again, in those plain trousers.

 

How the heat is driven off course.

How one can make out the clarified vowels of bridges.

 

Who’s keeping count of what’s given against what’s stolen?

 

There's nothing I can't trace back to my coarse immigrant blood.

 

Uncles tipple wine on the streets of Mott and Bayard.

Night shifts meet day shifts in passing.

 

Sweat seasons the body that labors.

 

And in each noodle shop, bowls dusted with salt.

 

"
"

Ice, entire cakes of it.

Crows feed on sand.

 

So poor is this season

the ground steals color

from the tree-shadows.

 

 

 

            •

 

 

 

Can it be that nothing

is as far as here?

 

Just look!

 

How much past we have

to cover this evening–

 

 

              •

 

 

 

Come to think of it

don't forget to pick

off this self and that self

along the way.

 

Though that’s not right–

you spit them out like pits.

 

 

              •

 

 

 

If there is a partition between

the outer and inner worlds,

how is it that some water in me churns

between the mountain ranges?

 

How is it we are absorbed so easily

by the ground—

 

 

              •

 

 

 

Long nights for simple words.

 

 

              •

 

 

 

Slant rhyme of current thinking

and past thinking.

 

A chewed over hour, late.

Where the long ago past

and the future come

to settle scores.

 

 

               •

 

 

 

Traveling and traveling,

but so much interior

unpicked over by the eyes.

 

 

 

                •

 

 

 

Nothing is as far as here.

 

"
"

I’m not yet comfortable with the word,

its short clean woosh that sounds like

life. At dinner last night my single girls

said in admonition, “It’s not wife-approved”

about a friend’s upcoming trip. Their

eyes rolled up and over and out their

pretty young heads. Wife, why does it

sound like a job? “I need a wife” the famous

feminist wrote, “a wife that will keep my

clothes clean, ironed, mended, replaced

if need be.” A word that could be made

easily into maid. A wife that does, fixes

soothes, honors, obeys, Housewife,

fishwife, bad wife, good wife, what’s

the word for someone who stares long

into the morning, unable to even fix tea

some days, the kettle steaming over

loud like a train whistle, she who cries

in the mornings, she who tears a hole

in the earth and cannot stop grieving,

the one who wants to love you, but often

isn’t good at even that, the one who

doesn’t want to be diminished

by how much she wants to be yours.

"
"

When you come, bring your brown-

ness so we can be sure to please

 

the funders. Will you check this

box; we’re applying for a grant.

 

Do you have any poems that speak

to troubled teens? Bilingual is best.

 

Would you like to come to dinner

with the patrons and sip Patrón?

 

Will you tell us the stories that make

us uncomfortable, but not complicit?

 

Don’t read the one where you

are just like us. Born to a green house,

 

garden, don’t tell us how you picked

tomatoes and ate them in the dirt

 

watching vultures pick apart another

bird’s bones in the road. Tell us the one

 

about your father stealing hubcaps

after a colleague said that’s what his

 

kind did. Tell us how he came

to the meeting wearing a poncho

 

and tried to sell the man his hubcaps

back. Don’t mention your father

 

was a teacher, spoke English, loved

making beer, loved baseball, tell us

 

again about the poncho, the hubcaps,

how he stole them, how he did the thing

 

he was trying to prove he didn’t do.

"
"

I can’t undress from the pressure of leaves,

the lobed edges leaning toward the window

like an unwanted male gaze on the backside,

(they wish to bless and bless and hush).

What if I want to go devil instead? Bow

down to the madness that makes me. Drone

of the neighbor’s mowing, a red mailbox flag

erected, a dog bark from three houses over,

and this is what a day is. Beetle on the wainscoting,

dead branch breaking, but not breaking, stones

from the sea next to stones from the river,

unanswered messages like ghosts in the throat,

a siren whining high toward town repeating

that the emergency is not here, repeating

that this loud silence is only where you live.

"
"

After the birthing of bombs of forks and fear

the frantic automatic weapons unleashed,

the spray of bullets into a crowd holding hands,

that brute sky opening in a slate metal maw

that swallows only the unsayable in each of us, what’s

left? Even the hidden nowhere river is poisoned

orange and acidic by a coal mine. How can

you not fear humanity, want to lick the creek

bottom dry, to suck the deadly water up into

your own lungs, like venom? Reader, I want to

say: Don’t die. Even when silvery fish after fish

comes back belly up, and the country plummets

into a crepitating crater of hatred, isn’t there still

something singing? The truth is: I don’t know.

But sometimes, I swear I hear it, the wound closing

like a rusted-over garage door, and I can still move

my living limbs into the world without too much

pain, can still marvel at how the dog runs straight

toward the pickup trucks break-necking down

the road, because she thinks she loves them,

because she’s sure, without a doubt, that the loud

roaring things will love her back, her soft small self

alive with desire to share her goddamn enthusiasm,

until I yank the leash back to save her because

I want her to survive forever. Don’t die, I say,

and we decide to walk for a bit longer, starlings

high and fevered above us, winter coming to lay

her cold corpse down upon this little plot of earth.

Perhaps we are always hurtling our body towards

the thing that will obliterate us, begging for love

from the speeding passage of time, and so maybe,

like the dog obedient at my heels, we can walk together

peacefully, at least until the next truck comes.

"
"

The truth is, I’ve never cared for the National

Anthem. If you think about it, it’s not a good

song. Too high for most of us with “the rockets

red glare” and then there are the bombs.

(Always, always, there is war and bombs.)

Once, I sang it at homecoming and threw

even the tenacious high school band off key.

But the song didn’t mean anything, just a call

to the field, something to get through before

the pummeling of youth. And what of the stanzas

we never sing, the third that mentions “no refuge

could save the hireling and the slave”? Perhaps,

the truth is, every song of this country

has an unsung third stanza, something brutal

snaking underneath us as we blindly sing

the high notes with a beer sloshing in the stands

hoping our team wins. Don’t get me wrong, I do

like the flag, how it undulates in the wind

like water, elemental, and best when it’s humbled,

brought to its knees, clung to by someone who

has lost everything, when it’s not a weapon,

when it flickers, when it folds up so perfectly

you can keep it until it’s needed, until you can

love it again, until the song in your mouth feels

like sustenance, a song where the notes are sung

by even the ageless woods, the short-grass plains,

the Red River Gorge, the fistful of land left

unpoisoned, that song that’s our birthright,

that’s sung in silence when it’s too hard to go on,

that sounds like someone’s rough fingers weaving

into another’s, that sounds like a match being lit

in an endless cave, the song that says my bones

are your bones, and your bones are my bones,

and isn’t that enough?

"
"

There is a river under this poem.

It flows blue and icy

And carries these lines down the page.

Somewhere beneath its surface

Lying chained to the silt

Harry holds his breath

And slowly files

His fingernails into moons.

He wonders who still waits at the dock

If the breasts of those young girls

Have developed since he sank.

He thinks of his parents

Of listening to the tumblers

Of his mother's womb

Of escaping upward out of puberty

Out of the pupils in his father's eyes

And those hot Wisconsin fields.

He dreams of escaping

From this poem

Of cracking the combinations

To his own body

And those warm young safes

Of every girl on the dock.

Jiggling his chains

Harry scares a carp that circles

And nibbles at his feet.

He feels the blue rush of the current

Sweeping across his body

Stripping his chains of their rust

Until each link softens

And glows like a tiny eel.

And Harry decides to ascend.

He slips with the water

Through his chains

And climbing over and over

His own air bubbles

He waves to the fish

To his chains glittering

And squirming in the silt.

He pauses to pick a bouquet

Of seaweed for the young girls

on the dock. Rising

He bursts the surface of this poem.

He listens for shouts.

He hears only the night

And a buoy sloshing in the blue.

"
"

Swimming the English Channel, struggling to make it to Calais, I swam into Laura halfway across.

My body oiled for warmth,

black rubber cap on my head,

eyes hidden behind goggles,

I was exhausted, ready to drown,

when I saw her coming toward me,

bobbing up and down between waves,

effortlessly doing a breaststroke,

headed for Dover. Treading water,

I asked in French if she spoke English,

and she said, “Yes, I’m an American.”

I said, “Hey, me too,” then asked her out for coffee.

"
"

In the tower the bell

is alone, like a man

in his room,

thinking and thinking.

 

The bell is made of iron.

It takes the weight

of a man

to make the bell move.

 

Far below, the bell feels

hands on a rope.

It considers this.

It turns its head.

 

Miles away,

a man in his room

hears the clear sound,

and lifts his head to listen.

"
"

What I envy in the open eyes

of the dead deer hanging down

from the rafters, its eyes

still wet and glassy, but locked now

into a vision of another life,

is the way it seems to be

staring at the moment when

it died. The blue light

falling through the window

into this smoke-filled room

is the same color as the mist

coming down off the mountain

that morning: the deer sees

men with guns

but also sees, beyond them,

the endless mountains.

"
"

My mother–half-deaf,

a small metal box

pinned to her blouse,

 

and beneath the gray locks

the hidden earphone,

the wire running across

 

her heart to its home

in her ear–can barely

hear me anymore. I’m

 

just someone’s voice

lost years ago, trying now

to make myself clear,

 

deliberately now,

so she will see how

hard the words come.

 

Bent to her breast, I speak

to the heart, almost hopeless,

where hardly anyone

 

is ever heard.

"
"

Even C.P. Cavafy–

cynical, ascetic,

unknown in his day–

printed at his own expense

poems no one would publish,

poems intimate, personal,

to share with readers

he called friends.

 

But I have hundreds of poems

hidden away in a box.

Even when I know

Cavafy once wrapped verse

with black and gold ribbons

to give away as a gift.

 

"
"

Valentine’s Day breakfast at Baker’s Square:

Laura drinks coffee while I watch Andrew,

who refuses to sit but chooses instead

to stay in the restaurant’s vestibule where

he opens and closes the big double doors

over and over again, as if he’s practicing

a grand entrance–entering, crossing

the threshold, and letting the doors

close behind him. I’m thinking,

 

it wasn’t so long ago I carried my tiny son

piggyback through the woods to a waterfall;

wasn’t long ago I kissed Laura for the first time;

wasn’t long ago I lived in the house with my dog

and sat with my notebook at the kitchen table

on Sunday morning after working all night–

sipping burnt coffee and scratching out lines,

lighting my hundredth cigarette, starting over

again, determined to write a love poem.

"
"

Will the children forgive the generation

that’s trampled by horses of war,

by exile and preparation for departure?

 

Will they think of us as we were,

a bunch of ambushes in ravines

we’d shake our jealousy

and carve trees into the earth's shirt

to sit under,

we, the factional fighters

who’d shoo the clouds of war out of their vehicles

and peer around our eternal siege

or catch the dead

like sudden fruit fallen on a wasteland?

  

Will the children forgive what we were,

some missile shepherds

and masters of exile and frenzied celebration,

whenever a neighboring war gestured to us

we rose

to set up in its braids a place

good for love and residence?

 

           The bombing rarely took a rest

the missile launchers rarely returned unharmed

we rarely picked flowers for the dead or went on

with our lives

 

If only that summer had given us a bit

of time's space before our mad departure

 

Will they believe?

 

"
"

No dead on the streets today

is a calm day,

traffic is normal,

there's ample room for the procession

of yesterday's dead,

room to add

             a dream, an idea, a little boy,

             an extra push for the beloved boat,

             a nom de guerre for the cell,

             a rose for a new love,

             a hand to a comrade

 

Some room to stay alive for some time,

enough time to shake your hands

and reach the sun

 

Today is a calm day, a pedestrian day

in Beirut dancing in the streets,

obstructing buses and not buying

newspapers:

          the newspapers already went out to offices

and the dead are resting on the Pavement of Martyrs

at the outskirts of Sabra

 

A calm day,

our neighbor will step out in her nightgown

to hang some sleepiness around us,

some sluggish waking

she's too lethargic to gather letters into words

 

Where is life on this vast sauntering morning?

We won't leave

Out of the whiteness of her gown a reason

will come to carry us down to the streets

dead in her ""Good morning""

"
"

      1

I will cry to regret

and slaughter my heart

on a desolate rock in the steppe

and run in the wilderness run

in their illusions in the mirrors

of bullets while shooing

victory and defeat

and also the dead

with war's twig

 

    2

I will arch my back like a noble wolf

and howl in the plains

until the plains go mad

and the god of soldiers spots me lifeless

in war's meanness

I'd be pleased yet angry

and forlorn of seas that have tolled

for thirty centuries

they come and go

 

     3

I call to my friend

and leave him standing in speech

I call to my lover

and leave her insomniac

"
"

And I will bend down to smell his desire

his tomb's flowers and marble

his wilting joy

his swapping temptation for content

 

And I will keep him from the cold, visitors, oleander,

and the sons of bitches and say: No one

will resemble me like my father

his white stumbling and the illusion that plucks words

 

A shout that walks on two feeble legs

eyes me with the summer of discontent

and sprinkles me with water, turns me green

before it shakes the bitter dirt

off its fingers

… that's my father

he cried from a darkness in the grave

 

And I will gather the house of your chucked absence

as if we were alone on Earth

… you die

so I can fold the falcon's wings after its departure

and believe the silence that remains

 

"
"

Near the camp was a river

and in our house were absentees and hands

that will one day wake us in vain

 

I had just turned seven

while he was sitting in the shade

ironing his clothes

the blue jacket sagging over his shoulders

 

I paid no attention to the road

or the three steps

and didn't notice the carpet

 

I don't remember who was it that said

to me or to another

""When you grow up poetry will become your house""

 

The dust that eats the memories

always distances those folks

 

yet their chairs appear from afar,

from behind the hills and over the houses,

to hang in an air of summer and holm oak,

those shaded chairs that reach the heart

on shoulders topped

with five flowers

 

Which flowers are speech

which flowers are silence?

 

And I can't remember

whether it was my uncle who stood at the door,

whether we had palm and lotus trees

in our house in Karameh,

 

whether my mother

who gave birth to me on the shelf

was folding our clothes behind our father's back

so he could sleep

 

The watchdogs used to cry from the heat,

and poetry, Husseini of Jerusalem,

and Khidr the mystic were all in our house

as was my uncle who came from a pond

within Hebron's walls

 

Twenty years would pass before a photo could tell us

we have grown older

and that's that

 

My father used to discompose his friends

with his days, and women

with the thread of seduction in his voice

as he would sprinkle chatter in their rivers

while walking about here or there with a lilt,

he'd let his days fall off him

and let others gather them as he walked

on gold that came only for him

 

And I can't remember:

in our courtyard there were holm oaks,

a fountain, a tiled floor by a huge door,

we were confused and in a hurry

 

The closet that faced us in the second room

had a mirror

the mirror we now seek

 

And my father was standing alone in the hall that led

the stairs to the roof

thanking his days

or preparing for Wednesday's nap

or Thursday's morning

as he left, among the things he'd leave, the water can

full of water

while around his chairs our Saturdays rose

 

My father didn't want too much from life:

a house, five boys

who don't mess with his papers,

which were already chaos,

and two girls

so that braids could float all around the house

"
"

my god all the days we have lived thru

saying

 

not this

one, not this,

not now,

not yet, this week

doesn’t count, was lost, this month

was shit, what a year, it sucked,

it flew, that decade was for

what? i raised my kids, they

grew i lost two pasts–i am

not made of them and they

are through.

 

we forget what

we remember:

 

each of the five

the fevered few

 

days we used to

fall in love.

"
"

O my Love sent me a lusty list,

Did not compare me to a summer's day

Wrote not the beauty of mine eyes

But catalogued in a pretty detailed

And comprehensive way the way(s)

In which he was better than me.

""More capable of extra- and inter-

Polation. More well-traveled -rounded multi-

Lingual! More practiced in so many matters

More: physical, artistic, musical,

Politic(al) academic (I dare say!) social

(In many ways!) and (ditto!) sexual!”

And yet these mores undid but his own plea(s)(e)

And left, none-the-less, the Greater Moor of me.

 

"
"

If you can make a poem

a farmer finds useful,

you should be happy.

A blacksmith you can never figure out.

The worst to please is a carpenter.

"
"

When I was young, exorcisms were quite common, a remedy not unlike


ice baths. Plus, devils were shorter in those days just as people were.


They hadn't eaten enough fruits or vegetables, and lacked essential


vitamins and iron, grew thin and pale, fell easily into brooding


depressions. They looked more like deer than sheep, and when they


possessed you it was usually because they were fleeing from someone


else and didn't realize where they were until it was too late. It was more


a question of giving directions than driving them out. ""Turn right at the


hairdresser's, go straight until you get to the abandoned schoolhouse,


then turn left. You should see the exit from there."" ""Thank you. I was


completely lost."" ""You're welcome. Good luck."" ""You too, and thanks


again.""

"
"

There is a hole.

In the hole is everything

people will do

to each other.

 

The hole goes down and down.

It has many rooms

like graves and like graves

they are all connected.

 

Roots hang from the dirt

in craggy chandeliers.

It's not clear

where the hole stops

 

beginning and where

it starts to end.

It's warm and dark down there.

The passages multiply.

 

There are ballrooms.

There are dead ends.

The air smells of iron and

crushed flowers.

 

People will do anything.

They will cut the hands off children.

Children will do anything—

 

In the hole is everything.

"
"

It is easy to love a pig in a nightgown.

See how he sleeps, white flannel

straining his neck at the neckhole.

His body swells and then deflates.

The gown is nothing to be ashamed of, only

the white clay of moonlight smeared

over his hulk, original clothing, the milk

of his loneliness. The flickering candle

of a dream moves his warty eyelids.

All sleeping things are children.

"
"

I  Self-Portrait

A house

with three stories.

In the basement, monsters.

The upper floors were empty.

No furniture, nothing.

I had a magic pebble

that I needed to hide.

But where?

Woke in a room

with the bed breathing.

Each day the same

scandal—this body.

These teeth and hands.

 

 

 

 

 

2  The Miniature Bed

A miniature bed, and in it two tiny people

not sleeping, not able to sleep because

a small lie has flowered between them,

fragile as a new, white crocus.

The miniature bed holds them like a miniature boat

making its slow, true course to morning.

These tiny people, thoughts thrumming like mice,

are quiet as the lie blooms over them

in the night, fanning its moth petals,

becoming to them like a moon hovering

over their bed, a moon they might almost touch

with their miniature hands, if they weren't certain

that one wrong gesture might break

the spindles of their small world, if their hearts

were not drops of trembling quicksilver,

if they were brave, if they could see

that small is no smaller than big, that thimbles

are deep as oceans for any god, they might even

touch each other then, opening the dark,

like a match, the sun's flaring.     

3  Harvest

 

The fields are a book of uses.

Near the house

a combine takes the corn down

in long rows.

Dust rises up and replaces itself.

A quick net of starlings

drops to the furrows

and sunshine pours like polished grain

onto the feeding earth,

this country.

 

In the kitchen, milk streams

from the gallon

thin and fresh as luck.

We flourish.

All around us, things flourish.

Cows strain the fence with their abundance.

The herd makes a sound like swelling.

 

Out in the cut field

birds clean the fallen cobs

into sets of teeth.     

4  Sonnet for Lost Teeth

 

The combines were tearing off the field’s clothes.

It was August, haying season. My tooth

was loose, a snag in the clam of my mouth.

I worked it like a pearl. I'd been out of school

for sixty days. In the sweat of the barn

I watched him shoot the calf in the head.

He wiped the hide gently, like cleaning his glasses.

Overnight, I grew a beard so I wouldn't

have to get married. I let my feet go black

from burned grasses. It never gets easier

he said, kicking straw over the blood patch.

She went down so quiet it was almost

sad. Later, when my tooth fell out, I buried it

under my pillow and it grew into money.     

5  Talisman

 

Waiting for the school bus you find

the femur of a baby animal

on the ground. You carry

that femur in your pocket

the entire morning and touch it

secretly through the cloth.

When the teacher asks

a question you don't raise

your hand but quietly

wrap your fingers around

the thin shape, that bone

without a mother.     

6  On Waking

 

Half of everything is invisible.

A river drifts below the river.

A gesture lost in the body.

Wind moves through the open

windows of the trees.

 

Beyond the day, another day.

 

Dreamed I was drowning

my mother's silk laundry

in the river,

kneeling on the wet rocks.

Back and forth I drowned it

in the gray clouds...     

7  Eros

 

Each year fish run the green vein of the river.

The bones of skunks lie buried in the riverbank

upside down, waiting for rain.

 

From a fragment of a Greek statue

you can tell the posture of the whole god.

A skeleton has the same intelligence.

 

So that when a girl discovers it,

loosened by summer rain, surfaced

like a white instrument in the grass,

she suddenly knows how to take it up

and shake the strange rhythms from it like castanets.     

8  A Childhood

 

The horse had been beaten and flies

crawled excited on the beat marks.

He held still in the sunblazed pasture.

For a few minutes I stood at the wire fence.

He was aware of me, but he did not turn—

except his eye, slightly. He listened

through the many ears of the grasses.

A jay made a hole in the air with its cry.

Everywhere, invisible as heat, the gods

married each other and went to war.

The excitement of it vibrated in the flies.

As if we both were standing still

inside some greater, more violent motion.

 

"
"

What is so pure as grief? A wreck

set sail just to be wrecked again.

To lose what’s lost–it’s all born lost

and we just fetch it for a little while,

a dandelion span, a quarter-note.

Each day an envelope gummed shut

with honey and mud. Foolish

to think you can build a house

from suffering. Even the hinges will be

bitter. There will be no books

in that house, only transfusions.

And all the lemon and cedar

in the world won't rid the walls

of that hospital smell.

"
"

It’s all the rage to sport waxed moustaches

and cure your own sausages

in some mildewy basement that formerly

would have hosted convulsively

awkward parties with spin the bottle and seven

minutes in the dark and terrifying closet

(aka heaven) but now boasts soppressata

strung on repurposed vintage drying racks

and fat clay pots of kombucha and curdling hops.

Personally I've never recovered from the sex-shaped

void left in those closets by all the groping

that should have occurred to me but didn't:

right under my nose kids my age were creeping

into adulthood one clammy, trembling palm

on one breast at a time. There was also

the horror of not being chosen in gym.

It is conceivable that learning intricately

how to butcher an entire hog

and render every morsel might give one

a feeling of mastery one lacked in childhood.It is the greatest immaturity to believe sufferingentitles you to something someone wiser

and grayer than I once said.

But in those basements and carpools and

playgrounds as I assassinated one by one

clandestinely my torturers

abandoning their foul normal

bodies to compost the astonishing

tedium of the wending suburban lanes,

I was transubstantiating to supernal

fame and beauty and such eerie genius

that entire books were written about my

books. In fact it takes a long time to realize

your suffering is of very little consequence

to anyone but you. And by that time the future

is already happening and you're pickling okra

and starfruit and foraging for morels in urban forests

and suspending artisan mozzarella in little wet nets

and crafting small-batch, nitrite-free data

and maybe even thinking about having

children, which you swore in a million

billion years you would never do.

 

"
"

I want to write my lover a poem

but a very bad one. It'll include

a giant squid and some loose change

 

and cuff links and two blue ferries chugging

headfirst on the East River at twenty-six knots

and only at the last minute averting

 

disaster through quick thinking and sure reflexes. Also

a bow and arrow and glossy red apple

I perch in front of my heart. To be honest

 

my lover doesn't really like poetry,

which I guess is why I plan to write

such a bad one, so he can feel right

 

and strong and good in his beliefs.

Tonight when I go see my lover

he’ll hold me as I've never been held

 

except by him and then I'll have to give him

back. When you get new things

you treat them like glass for a while

 

and then get used to them

and manhandle them

like everything else.

 

I don't want to give him back

but partly it's not up to me and

partly I don't want to be his

 

old sofa. I want to radiate and gleam

arrestingly until the certain, premature

end. You can compose a whole life

 

out of these rollercoasters.

You can be everywhere

and nowhere, over and over

life slapping you in the face

 till you’re newly burnished

flat-out gasping and awake.

 

"
"

After three weeks of hot weather and drought,

           we've had a week of cold and rain,

just the way it ought to be here in the north,

            in June, a fire going in the woodstove

all day long, so you can go outside in the cold

            and rain anytime and smell

the wood smoke in the air.

 

This is the way I love it. This is why

           I came here almost

fifty years ago. What is June anyway

          without cold and rain

and a fire going in the stove all day?

 

"
"

I can feel myself slipping away, fading away, withdrawing

from this life, just as my father did. When the pain you're in

 

is so great you can’t think about or pay attention to anything

but your own pain, the rest of the world and all other life

 

don't matter.

 

I think about my friends with dementia, cancer, arthritis, and

how much more pain they are in than I am, but it does no good,

 

their pain is not mine, and therefore, no matter how magnanimous

I might want to be, their pain is not as important to me as my own.

"
"

When I came to this mountainside almost fifty years ago it never occurred to me that there would be an end to it.         I went along never thinking about the time when I would have to quit. I imagined—I guess — all this would last forever, if I imagined it at all. Now I'm in my seventies and all I can think about is the time when my life will be here no more.


         For example, I love being in the woods felling and bucking hardwood trees, stacking and covering the blocks, then a year or two later, hauling them to the woodshed where I stack them again, and split them all winter long into the right size for the weather—then bring them into the house.         Now this chore I love so much is seriously painful, and I can see, now, an end to it.


 

"
"

The eye’s desire for relief.

I’m the tiger lily bobbing in the heat.

And also the neighbor, shaved bald and

lifting weights on the balcony. Each petal

is the receipt of a shameful dream—

a thought we hadn’t wanted to incorporate

lolling from my parted mouth.

But you know it’s mistakes that make life happen.

A cardboard suitcase of beer for the traveler.

And if we get too close to the words

on this page they soften and warp

into an animal lace, some net

whose logic won’t reveal itself. I pull our eyes

back because I love you. But then you draw them

back further still because that sounds like an excuse.

The whiny version of Love Hurts loops and curls

like ribbon through a scissor, being pulled

across the blade. The money in this poem’s

easy, if you don’t mind having no thoughts and

sitting in one place, while your body changes shape.

 

"
"







For js







You were laughing no you weren't she was she was she wasn't

These aren't the right words

The people are waiting on the platform and the decisions are being themselves as usual 

You could take this silver cord and wrap it around all of your ideas 

You could you could

What is the way to make meaning

You're less busy than the machine has time for 

I poured the world in for you 

All the sun on that block

Or at least I wanted to:

Everyone is leaving but this would be an arrival your torso is a drum people come through and then they die you see the obituary in passing as the man next to you folds the paper and all these people at all these parties that cannot be the answer but what

Back above ground and it's the same sun different block same world different world 

Your friend is lying down with the thing he is carrying

Everybody is somebody's family you think you forget the sun keeps going still you keep going the world rearranges itself just so

False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say you wrap yourself in the future you wrap yourself in the past the woman gets in the taxi just in time

Everybody is it's not an easy thing to understand

False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say the sun keeps  going.

"
"

I come from the nether regions

 

They serve me pomegranate seeds with morsels of flying fish

 

From time to time I wear a crown of blood streaked grass.

 

 

Mama beat me when I was a child for stealing honey from a honey pot

 

It swung from the rafters of the kitchen.

 

Why I stuffed my mouth with golden stuff, no one could tell.

 

 

King Midas wore a skin that killed him.

 

My nails are patterned ebony, Doxil will do that

 

They made a port under my collar bone with a plastic tube that runs into a blood vessel.

 

 

 

I set out with mama from Bombay harbor.

 

Our steamer was SS Jehangir, in honor of the World Conqueror —

 

They say he knelt on the battle field to stroke the Beloved’s shadow.

 

 The waves were dark in Bombay harbor, Gandhi wrote in his Autobiography

 Writing too is an experiment with truth.

 

No one knows my name in Arabic means port.

 

 

On board white people would not come near us

 

Were they scared our brown skin would sully them?

 

Mama tried to teach me English in a sing song voice.

 

 

So you can swim into your life she said.

 

Wee child, my language tutor muttered ruler in hand, ready to strike,

 

Just pronounce the words right:

 

 Pluck, pluck             Suck, suck

 

 

          Duck, duck

                                           

 

                               Stuck, stuck.

 

 

 

 

 

May 12 - July 4, 2018, NYC

 

"
"

To map the consequences of regardless, of underestimate,

   Of feverish faith, of the mechanical modernism of your false terrain. As if

Port Sulphur remained nominal, its slick globules merely figurative

      Between territories of wait and wetlands of trust.

 

To etch the shallow-water horizon— a techno-utopian tribute

         To shrimp estuaries, bird rookeries, oyster bays,

To tube worms & sea turtles. To watercolor these pelican grasses,

            Oxidized, unapologetic executive marshes, roseated spoonbills.

 

For you who longed to smear concentric circles,

            To have trusted you with longitude and latitude,

To blur this sargassum border between mourning,

               Fighting, and willful denying of objects and subjects. As if

 

Generations of fishermen, scaling orders of magnitude,

                  Navigated oily streaks of miles in a legend of inches,

Skeletal, ghostly swarms of now-opaque, milky jellyfish. As if

                     to bury the blowout, rescind the rig. To fortify, to intone.

 

If naming were not violence, to witness an active verb:                     Top kill, junk shot, top hat, dance dance revolution.

These wayward scripts a frontier province palimpsest.

                        Offshore yet another beacon, another account. Explosive violet iridescent.

 

"
"

Everyone wants to write about god

but no one wants to imagine their god

 

as the finger trembling inside a grenade

pin’s ring or the red vine of blood coughed into a child’s palm

 

while they cradle the head of a dying parent.

Few things are more dangerous than a man

 

who is capable of dividing himself into several men,

each of them with a unique river of desire

 

on their tongues. It is also magic to pray for a daughter

and find yourself with an endless march of boys

 

who all have the smile of a motherfucker who wronged you

and never apologized. No one wants to imagine their god

 

as the knuckles cracking on a father watching their son

picking a good switch from the tree and certainly

 

no one wants to imagine their god as the tree.

Enough with the foolishness of hope and how it bruises

 

the walls of a home where two people sit, stubbornly in love

with the idea of staying. If one must pray, I imagine

 

it is most worthwhile to pray towards endings.

The only difference between sunsets and funerals

 

is whether or not a town mistakes the howls

of a crying woman for madness.

 

"
"

when it pushes shadow from the trees

and presses it from their needles outside the Dye House

and the bus is dark inside     when it picks apart the lawn

and you are here

will you soften me?      for the sun

will you deflect it?

I am blinking in the atrium    the library

I don’t know if you have a room for me

or where on me you can lie down

 

but I want my anger easily exhausted

the way fact takes the rug from an argument

we both go on the floor

I do feel your shade

your wavy boughs   you dream

you are leaving me

I would become an ordinary person if you did

but you are awake   and I am ordinary anyway

and it pushes through me

 

  

"
"

Ya kut unta pishno ma*Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

 

So I moved to this place,

Iowa City, Ioway

Where green-headed mallards

walk the streets day and night,

and defecate on sidewalks.

Greasy meat bags in wetsuits,

disguise themselves as pets

and are free as birds.

Maybe Indians should have thought of that?

 Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

 

Maybe you would have

left us alone,

if we put on rubber bills,

and rubber feet,

Quacked instead of complained,

Swam instead of danced

waddled away when you did

what you did…

 Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

 

So I moved to the Place

The “Jewel of the Midwest”

Where ghosts of ourselves

Dance the sulphur trails.

 

Fumes emerge continuous

from the mouths of

Three-faced Deities who preach,

“We absolve joy through suffering.”

 Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

 

So I moved to this place where

in 1992, up washed Columbus again

like a pointy-chinned Son of Cannibals.

His spin doctors rewrite his successes

“After 500 years and 25 million dead,

One out of 100 American Indians commit suicide

One out of 10 American Indians are alcoholics

49 years is the average lifespan of American Indians.”

 

Each minute burns

the useful and useless alike

Sing Hallelujah

Praise the Lord

 Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

 

And when you foreigners

build your off-world colonies

and relocate in outer space

This is what we will do

We will dance,

We will dance,

We will dance

to a duck’s tune.

 Ya kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno maYa kut unta pishno ma

"
"

Look up: blazing chrysanthemums in rose

shriek into bloom above the Tilt-a-Whirls,

hang for a blink, then die in smoky swirls.

They scream revolt at what the body knows:

all revels end. We clap and sigh. Then, no—

another rose! another peony! break,

flame, roar, as though by roaring they might make

the rides whirl in perpetuum. As though

we need not finally, wearily turn, to plow

back through the crush of bodies, the lank air,

to buses that inch us, sweating, across town.

As though we were not dropped in silence there

to trudge the last blocks home, the streetlamps low,

the crickets counting summer's seconds down.

 

"
"

His muddy rubber boots

stood in the farmhouse mud room

while he sat in the kitchen,

unshaven, dealing solitaire.

 

His wife (we called her Auntie)

rolled out dough in the kitchen

for a pie, put up preserves

and tidied, clearing her throat.

 

They listened to the TV

at six, he with his fingers

fumbling the hearing aids,

she watching the kitchen clock.

 

Old age went on like that,

a vegetable patch, a horse

some neighbor kept in the barn,

the miles of grass and fences.

 

After he died his boots

stood muddy in the mud room

as if he'd gone in socks,

softly out to the meadow.

 

"
"

Some days her main job seems to be

to welcome back the Red Admiral

as it lights on a leaf of the yellow

forsythia. It is her duty to stop & lean

over to take in how it folds & opens

its wings. Then, too, there is the common

Tiger Swallowtail, which seems to her

entirely uncommon in how it moves

about the boundaries of this clearing

we made so many years ago. If she leaves

the compost bucket unwashed to rescue

a single tattered wing from under the winter

jasmine or the blue flowers of the periwinkle

& then spends a whole afternoon at our round

oak table surrounded by field guides

& tea until she is sure—yes—that it belongs to

a Lorquin's Admiral, or that singular

mark is one of the great cat's eyes

of a Milbert's Tortoiseshell, then she is

simply practicing her true vocation

learning the story behind the blue beads

of the Mourning Cloak, the silver commas

of the Satyr Anglewing, the complex shades

of the Spring Azure, moving through this life

letting her sweet, light attention land

on one luminous thing after another.

 

"
"

He sees through stone

he has the secret eyes

this old black one

who under prison skies

sits pressed by the sun

against the western wall

his pipe between purple gums

 

the years fall

like overripe plums

bursting red flesh

on the dark earth

 

his time is not my time

but I have known him

in a time gone

 

he led me trembling cold

into the dark forest

taught me the secret rites

to make it with a woman

to be true to my brothers

to make my spear drink

the blood of my enemies

 

now black cats circle him

flash white teeth

snarl at the air

mashing green grass beneath

shining muscles

ears peeling his words

he smiles

he knows

the hunt    the enemy

he has the secret eyes

he sees through stone

"
"

 Exchange in greed the ungraceful signs. Thrust

The thick notes between green apple breasts.

Then the shadow of the devil descends,

The violent space cries and angel eyes,

Large and dark, retreat in innocence and in ice.

(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)

 

The violent space cries silently,

Like you cried wide years ago

In another space, speckled by the sun

And the leaves of a green plum tree,

And you were stung

By a red wasp and we flew home.

(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)

 

Well, hell, lil sis, wasps still sting.

You are all of seventeen and as alone now

In your pain as you were with the sting

On your brow.

Well, shit, lil sis, here we are:

You are I and this poem.

And what should I do? should I squat

In the dust and make strange markings on the ground?

Shall I chant a spell to drive the demon away?

(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)

 

In the beginning you were the Virgin Mary,

And you are the Virgin Mary now.

But somewhere between Nazareth and Bethlehem

You lost your name in the nameless void.“O Mary don’t you weep don’t you moan” 

O Mary shake your butt to the violent juke,

Absorb the demon puke and watch the white eyes pop,

(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)

 

And what do I do. I boil my tears in a twisted spoon

And dance like an angel on the point of a needle.

I sit counting syllables like Midas gold.

I am not bold. I cannot yet take hold of the demon

And lift his weight from you black belly,

So I grab the air and sing my song.

(But the air cannot stand my singing long.)

"
"

She is girl. She is gravel. She is grabbed. She is grabbed like handfuls of gravel. Gravel grated by water. Her village is full of gravel fields. It is 1950. She is girl. She is grabbed. She is not my grandmother, though my grandmother is girl. My grandmother’s father closes the gates. Against American soldiers, though they jump over stone walls. To a girl who is not my grandmother. The girl is gravel grabbed. Her language is gravel because it means nothing. Hands full of girl. Fields full of gravel. Korea is gravel and graves. Girl is girl and she will never be a grandmother. She will be girl, girl is gravel and history will skip her like stone over water. Oh girl, oh glory. Girl.


 

"
"

There was a man. A Japanese soldier. One that did not believe in old superstitions. One that did not believe in sex before battle as charm against harm. He was an odd man. One that did not carry an amulet with pubic hair of a comfort woman. Or any piece of her. His comrades said, Be a man. The equation is, an odd man out is not man. There is no reason for logic in war. There is no reason. There was a man. His comrades said, Come raid, come pillage. Pushed him into the station. Their eyes on the holes in the wall. Watched as he came. Became. What is the equation here. There is a no equation. There was a man. One who said weeping, I am not a man, I am not a man.

"
"

I read a Korean poem

with the line “Today you are the youngest

you will ever be.” Today I am the oldest

I have been. Today we drink

buckwheat tea. Today I have heat

in my apartment. Today I think

about the word chada in Korean.

It means cold. It means to be filled with. 

It means to kick. To wear. Today we’re worn.

Today you wear the cold. Your chilled skin.

My heart knocks on my skin. Someone said

winter has broken his windows. The heat inside

and the cold outside sent lightning across glass.

Today my heart wears you like curtains. Today

it fills with you. The window in my room

is full of leaves ready to fall. Chada, you say. It’s tea. 

We drink. It is cold outside.

 

"
"

my school teacher          asked me     if I wanted         

             to go to Japan      do something good for the Emperor

we were led to a harbor

a cargo ship    a train

           to a factory in Doyamaki             where

Food was so scarce    we pulled grass, roots anything we could eat

girls died of hunger    some went crazy

I ran away   was found   by a Japanese soldier 

             Kobayashi

              took me

              to a hut            Every evening

              soldiers

countless soldiers        on the wild mountainside

             Kobayashi

An unusually quiet day

             I found Japan had lost the war

I sailed to Korea

jumped from the crates   hit my stomach with fists

I failed            I named him Young-ju

                        left him at an orphanage

met him every Sunday

             one Sunday

I saw another boy in his clothes

Young-ju had died of pneumonia

             already buried

I thought of Kobayashi bringing me rice

in his drunken stupor                         I thought of the piece of steel

I took    at the factory

I found some of the steel            so attractive

I still believe      he is alive

somewhere                 I want to believe

that all was just a terrible       fate

But then,

              But then

 

"
"

The calm, 

Cool face of the river

Asked me for a kiss. 

"
"



Let America be America again.

Let it be the dream it used to be.

Let it be the pioneer on the plain

Seeking a home where he himself is free.

 

(America never was America to me.)

 

Let America be the dream the dreamers dreamed—

Let it be that great strong land of love

Where never kings connive nor tyrants scheme

That any man be crushed by one above.

 

(It never was America to me.)

 

O, let my land be a land where Liberty

Is crowned with no false patriotic wreath,

But opportunity is real, and life is free,

Equality is in the air we breathe.

 

(There's never been equality for me,

Nor freedom in this ""homeland of the free."")

 Say, who are you that mumbles in the dark?

And who are you that draws your veil across the stars?"
"

    Upon reading PM newspaper’s account of Mr. Roosevelt’s statement on the recent race clashes: “I share your feeling that the recent outbreaks of violence in widely spread parts of the country endanger our national unity and comfort our enemies. I am sure that every true American regrets this.”

What’d you get, black boy,

When they knocked you down in the

   gutter,

 And they kicked your teeth out,

And they broke your skull with clubs

And they bashed your stomach in?

What’d you get when the police shot

  you in the back,

And they chained you to the beds

While they wiped the blood off?

What’d you get when you cried out to

  the Top Man?

When you called on the man next to

  God, so you thought,

And asked him to speak out to save

  you?

What’d the Top Man say, black boy?

“Mr. Roosevelt regrets. . . . . . .”

 

"
"

Now you are strong

And we are but grapes aching with ripeness.

Crush us!

Squeeze from us all the brave life

Contained in these full skins.

But ours is a subtle strength

Potent with centuries of yearning,

Of being kegged and shut away

In dark forgotten places.

 

We shall endure

To steal your senses

In that lonely twilight

Of your winter’s grief.

"
"

Not by hammering the furious word,

Nor bread stamped in the streets,

Nor milk emptied in gutter,

Shall we gain the gates of the city.

 

But I am a prophet without eyes to see;

I do not know how we shall gain the gates

                  of the city.August, 1943

 

"
"

We are spendthrifts with words,

We squander them,

Toss them like pennies in the air–

Arrogant words,

Angry words,

Cruel words,

Comradely words,

Shy words tiptoeing from mouth to ear.

 

But the slowly wrought words of love

and the thunderous words of heartbreak–

Those we hoard.

 

"
"

That field nag, old-penny

swayback. Low hawk, to

ducks in train to a quad of geese,

in case. Last night, the long

 

moon lay it seemed a tissue

of snow, but then dawn told

that wasn't so. Late morning, now,

the fire, the hearth, eggs

 

sitting for the mute plate

and fork, this pen making

a thing of them. Two more nights—

waterfowl safe and noisy

 

in the dusk, the low rails

running flank to the river

at midnight—find what they'll

make of that river, this moon.

 

"
"

       Most have been plowed up or paved over

but you can still find them, tracks cut

      deep into the earth by prairie schooners

crossing that great green ocean, pitching

      waves of pasture out where there's nothing

else to do but live. Concealing their detritus—

      a piece of sun-bleached buffalo skull, a button

from a cavalry soldier's coat—the ruts wind

      their way beneath leafy suburban streets, lie

buried under a Phillips 66 and the corner

      of a Pizza Hut where a couple sits slumped

in their booth. Yet here and there, like a fish

      head breaking the surface of the water, they

emerge in a school teacher's back yard or a

      farmer's field, evidence of wagons packed

with hardtack and hard money, thousands of

      draft animals tended by traders with blistered

feet, their journey both bleak and romantic.

      That's the kind of proof I like, a scar I can put

my hand to, history that will dust my fingers

      with a little bit of suffering, a little bit of bone.

"
"

Each night after reading three books to my two children—

we each picked one—to unwind them into dreamland,

I'd turn off the light and sit between their beds

in the wide junk-shop rocker I'd reupholstered blue,

still feeling the close-reading warmth of their bodies beside me,

and ask them to talk about the day—we did this,we did that, sometimes leading somewhere, sometimes

not, but always ending up at the happy ending of now.Now, in still darkness, listening to their breath slow and ease

into sleep's regular rhythm.

                                            Grown now, you might've guessed.

The past tense solid, unyielding, against the acidic drip

of recent years. But how it calmed us then, rewinding

the gentle loop, and in the trusting darkness, pressing play.

"
"







St. Joseph’s Hospital, Tacoma WA, 1969-74.







A headache makes your mouth plunge, then it pulls away. The smell of diesel or the smell of rain. Now you are a thick suburb. Under the pressure of a credit card. Your body is a box of mirrors, a mercury mine. You have blossomed and spread, white mystery of spring. All your blood and treasure is spent. O rose, you are sick. The morning rain does not nourish you. Your mouth is caught in a rigid O. Where only deficit is at home. You stand beneath a white hospital, almost drunk. You cannot say why your sense is drenched: exhaustion or debt. What’s the difference again? A braid of eyes. Curtains the color of a dove’s wing. Ceramic lips framed against seismic shatter. “Soft zone.” Meanwhile your uncle is dying in San Francisco and you do not know it. You are standing in front of another hospital whose patients are strangers. You unwind a rope of carbon so that you can post pictures of it on the internet. How much damage does your life do and how can you refuse? O rose, you are sick. Only injury sustains you.

"
"

as the early morning light reflected off leaves against my window I called you to say I was moving back and I cried so deeply the way I cried for weeks after I moved losing my breath hovering between waking and sleep on the day I left I stood on your balcony facing the Pacific Ocean watching the sea stretch past a gauze of power lines into a green horizon this summer I began to awaken with my body covered in a cold sweat a whippoorwill calling from beyond the ramshackle fence kept me calm through the darkness and earlier this spring my dear friend Charlie had mysteriously died and like so many secrets we shared he loved to tan turning a tone the color of a young Toni Tennille he loved to dance he loved to pray every night I lie and recite the Act of Contrition to settle my head I am sorry for my sins with all my heart in choosing to do wrong and failing to do good I have sinned against you whom I should love above all things and almost every night I’ve dreamt of Charlie reading by candlelight he is old his skin sags like the arms of a tulip tree how easy it is to listen to his voice I cradle my chin into his neck our beards brush together now as you answer the phone I hear the discordant steam of cargo ships murmur in the distance there is no reason to lie to you I have been dying since we met

"
"

At sunrise the deer eat

pieces of the quiet, they eat spaces

between the quiet

    & the sounds—;

         & the numbers on the calendar

lie flat in their boxes,

      they leak through tiny holes

             in the minutes,

            evenly so, so evenly,

 an active sense, before

         the sense was made…

 

There, now, opposite to set down,

            the agreed-upon, the shape

                 of the obvious

        drawn by an earlier

           enchantment before the new

                        anxiety set in:

         the workers are safe;

 the terror stilled for an hour;

a lover’s outline, dreamed or imagined,

       before you read the one-page book

     again, what was that book,

 it had no copyright—

 

& what was before?

         a life, the dazzler, the dark,

             the singing dust, it turned

when you turned, it orpheus-knew

what you forgot when you took the bowl

        of burning time across the room—

      & if the previous is closer

   to you now, should you

look, doesn’t matter if you do,

    you carry the some of it

with it, out into it—

 

                                                for LG 

 

"
"

She says she had a baby

but I don’t believe her

Let me tell you the feeling

of relief when I started to believe her

baby wasn’t real

“What’s she getting out of it?”

I surrender without a fight

Ok, you can have your baby

 

Sometimes all you can do is reify your worst fears

What if I can’t have healthy relationships

Ever

With anything

Even your cat

 

Undressing in the open window

Like being in public

Is it not knowing or not caring?

 

I’m offended reading memoir advertised as essay

I give a mini-lecture on insecure attachment

from the living room

As if to ask

Is that what you wanted?

Who you think I am

Improving my senses

You see I was siding with the baby

"
"

a tiny blue metal race car grandma

gave to me when I was 32.  There’s

an obelisk now in Skeleton Canyon.

Maybe you’re too close to the speaker.

Tell the Arthur Lee of Love confrontation

story. The tender does not approve of our

vulgarity. Double vocal for airports,

weekends and holidays. Numb grids

that represent human inaction. An incidental

arrival? Why that landing? The speaker of

the poem seems baffled to be in his/her

time continuum. Blind Willie McTell, Blind

Willie Johnson, playing together on the street corner.

Turn down the harp and make it feel more

distant. The next few minutes could hardly

be identified as words. A few fireman later,

the benefit of a lifelong love was clear. A locus

Of abnormal sensation. Harder to keep an

indiscriminate man from slaughter. Off state

extemporaneous crushed weight. Consulting

the at-bats for ideas of speed. I will be home

when my shirt is too dirty to wear.

"
"

Born again on a Monday

under a broken zodiac.

 

My father the woodman, a surgeon among snags,

could read the living trail of blades rebounding

in the field, the mopped-matte passage through the dew.

 

He woke a brush pile with fire

throwing shadows on the child, I was

thrown over.

 

Father, it was a pleasure to meet you

on this luminous route between two lives.

 

In this impromptu pool reaped from rain

where mosquitos multiply.

 

Though survival, I’m told, is impersonal

and without teleological purpose.

Malaria is just trying to maximize its own fitness

 

as are the corporations who, for palm oil set

the peatlands ablaze and drained the water table.

 

 

Dense haze from the sea

     choked the light from day

 

           suffused our mountain

in a numinous red corona.

And as for the getting over

 

there will be no ascension,

no circumambulation,

there is only going through.

 

We must go through it.

"
"







The soul descends once more in bitter love…


                                                                          —Richard Wilbur


 







The eyes

open to the cries

of police.

 

Skirting sleep,

the soul

industrial

 

as laundry—

realities

like bad checks,

 

burning

like new sex.

Dinner

 

is the better half

of someone’s

lunch. Someone’s

 

playing

a guessing

game:

 

Psychosis

or Handsfree.

Local fame.

 

Praying

to a calf,

or debt ceiling,

 

keeps

us grounded.                                                                                      

You can take

 

the kid

out the food court,

but child support

won’t upgrade

from buy

to buy—

 

outbid,

I am my

financial aide.

 

Astounded,

we wake

and take.

 

Let every boy

Tolstoy

with disease

 

have a chance.

Liabilities,

let’s dance.

 

We’re clean—

or rather, not

unclean—

 

doxycycline

our balance

sheet.

 

Our spirits, neat.

 

"
"

It was Adolphe Sax, remember,

not Saxo Grammaticus, who gets the ovation.

And by the time he had brought all the components

together–the serpentine shape, the single reed,

the fit of the fingers,

the upward tilt of the golden bell–

it was already 1842, and one gets the feeling

that it was also very late at night.

 

There is something nocturnal about the sound,

something literally horny,

as some may have noticed on that historic date

when the first odd notes wobbled out of his studio

into the small, darkened town,

 

summoning the insomniacs (who were up

waiting for the invention of jazz) to their windows,

but leaving the sleepers undisturbed,

evening deepening and warming the waters of their dreams.

 

For this is not the valved instrument of waking,

more the smoky voice of longing and loss,

the porpoise cry of the subconscious.

No one would ever think of blowing reveille

on a tenor without irony.

The men would only lie in their metal bunks,

fingers twined behind their heads,

afloat on pools of memory and desire.

 

And when the time has come to rouse the dead,

you will not see Gabriel clipping an alto

around his numinous neck.

 

An angel playing the world’s last song

on a glistening saxophone might be enough

to lift them back into the light of earth,

but really no further.

 

Once resurrected, they would only lie down

in the long cemetery grass

or lean alone against a lugubrious yew

and let the music do the ascending–

curling snakes charmed from their baskets–

while they wait for the shrill trumpet solo,

that will blow them all to kingdom come.

 

"
"

The earth shakes

just enough

to remind us. 

"
"







For Judy Williams Fraser 







1963-69 I lived on

the corner of Yew & York

on the 2nd floor

above  a corner store

with my sister Leni  & boyfriend soon to be husband Neap  Hoover

her friend Jo-Ann Huffman & her boyfriend Mike Sawyer

then  Elsa Young  (just left Robert who was with Maxine)

who met her lover Jack Wise next door

then my sister Mary

and my boyfriend  soon to be (later to unbe) husband Cliff Andstein

below us

bill bissett & martina & oolya  then painter-jogger  Gordon Payne

& Merrilyn  (who becomes my friend later)  then bill again then Gordon again

next to us

Bing Thom, Jay Bancroft & often Marian Penner, Rick Clarke

across the landing

John and Susan Newlove & children fathered by gerry gilbert

later the Ridgeways

and next to them directly opposite us:

Gerry Geisler (New Design Gallery)

and Helen Sturdy & children

our kitchen faced theirs

apple pies in my oven & stew or toast in theirs

we cd smell everything like the time we fell asleep as pork hocks

simmered in my big red pot

charred and burned almost caught on fire

would have if Gerry hadnt woken us up

and that building a total tinderbox

always worried bill wd start one

my bedroom / study faced

the Molson’s sign and Burrard Street Bridge

and I could watch the west end and highrises and planetarium grow

and white sheets on a clothesline across the street dry

as I’d sit at my bay window

and write and mark

on a smooth board cut to fit exactly the sill

I’d glance up and see

people like  you  &  Jamie  &  Carol  &  Joan  &  Marcia  & the Trumans

and the Gadds  and the Lathams  and Lanny Beckman

walking up and down Yew Street

open the window & shout

drop by on your way back

dropping by

everybody did it

days filled with coffee, tea, poetry, cigarette smoke

crises, trips, talkedy talk talk

painting hard edged  strong coloured

also  intricate silver point mandalas

and collages

a gallon of Calogna Red

one summery Saturday night

became a party

of 100 or even more

dancing in my bedroom to one music on a tape recorder

dancing in the other to another

drumming in the kitchen

talking in the room with the blue-tile fireplace

so many bodies I couldnt hear the music

from  inside the  hallway

just saw the taller heads

moving together to different beats

in almost darkness

that crazy night at the Wahs’ place

if that wasnt a party of this kind

everybody landing on that bed

everybody kissing everybody

we had to go outside to pee

because the lineup for the can so long

somehow to do with that small space

that it was so tight that everybody had to rub every

body simply to go anywhere

It was gorgeous

after the Vancouver Poetry Conference (1963)

Roy Kiyooka started

dropping by   when he left his studio

there’d always be a light on

somewhere in our building

and he could visit  any of us

separately or clustered

one time

he told me he had a painting he wanted to give me

but it was big and heavy

he borrowed a truck and someone helped him

up the dusty always dirty long stairs

with Hoarfrost

which we hung on a wall in a room just big enough to hold

my round oak table

(used to be Bowerings’ they bought a whole household of furniture for $80 and

when they moved they gave it to Joan and then when she moved she stored it

with me)

a wall that later Elsa and I tore apart with a screwdriver and hammer

shouting angry hexes at Robert all the way

after and during that conference--

Olson, Creeley, Duncan, Levertov, Avison, Whalen, Ginsberg--

Roy and I became friends

and there were readings in my room

every second Sunday

red cast iron pot full of bean soup, corn chowder, spicey meatball vegetable stew

simmering and then cheese scones in the oven

people would come and read their new work one week

and the next week there’d be a Tish meeting

with Daphne Marlatt, Dan MacLeod, Pete Auxier, David Cull & David Dawson

rent $60 a month didnt change

and some years it was cold

the wind so cold on side facing the North Shore

that Hydro was $60 per month

and that wall frozen behind my pillows

the police were something else

they felt they had a right to question anybody so

Cliff would be up at the laundromat on 4th or

at Jackson’s to get some hamburger and be walking back with an

economics book in one hand and meat wrapped in brown paper in the other

and they’d stop him and ask him what he was doing and my friend Ray Wargo

would get stopped almost every second time he’d drop in to visit

where are you going and why and how long will you be

someone was always getting busted

someone was always tripping out

someone was always visiting from   or going to  Europe or Japan

here is a journal entry on June 9:

evening of the first ever national leaders debate on TV

“I am looking forward to seeing Trudeau--hope he gets pushed into/onto

answering more directly than he has in the past. I, like many others including

every gay man I know, do have a crush on him: he has much more style than

any Canadian politician so far. I mean style in the true sense of the word, it is

him, not affected… Cliff, of course, doesn’t trust him at all and thinks he’s a sell-

out. I don’t go that far, yet. But I do think that compromising is the only way a

politician can work this country and I do not like all the PR, razzmatazz,

fundraising, and allegiances that go into just getting elected: our system seems

to be based on gullibility…”

coming home at night up Yew Street

whether from downtown or the beach or Paul the butcher’s or Elsie the baker’s

I loved looking up at my North-facing windows

goldy  gold  mesh curtains

light filtering through

so warm  and so inviting

 

"
"

No unclaimed, cremated mothers this year

 

Nor collateral white skin

 

No mothers folding clothes to a corporate park preamble

No sons singing under the bright lights of a lumber yard

 

Quantum reaganomics and the tap steps of turning on a friend

 

New York trophy parts among

            the limbs of decent people

 

                       Being an enraged artist is like

                       entering a room and not knowing what to get high off of

 

                                                      My formative symbols/My upbringing flying to an agent’s ears

                                                                                                          I might as well be an activist

 

                                                                                                 Called my girlfriend and described

                                                                All the bottles segregationists had thrown at me that day

 

                                                                   Described recent blues sites and soothing prosecutions

                                                                                                                     I feared for my poetry

 

You have to make art every once in a while

            While in the company of sell-outs

            Accountant books in deified bulk

            Or while waiting for a girl under a modern chandelier

                                               

                                                           Or in your last lobby as a wanderer

 

                                                                                                  The prison foot-races the museum

 

                                                                                                                        My instrument ends

 

                        I mean, what is a calendar to the slave?

                                               Also, what is a crystal prism?

 

                                                                                                                    “He bought this bullet,                                                                                                                                                             bought its flight,                                                                                                                                                       then bought two more”

 

 

"
"

    “A skeleton’s mouth makes few concessions to prettiness.”

                                                                             —Jacques Joubert

Because your mouth is violet and you cannot speak

Because maybe I like Thursdays the way I used to hate baths, and

baths are boundaries whose sharpness will be blurred with more information

Because movement itself is a form of currency

Frozen in articulations

Because don’t indulge yourself in the idea of restraint

The blackened patches could have been pubic hair on dead bodies, or simply

the wildness of neglect

without horizons or spaces

Because it’s a comfort to know waste is the fuel of contradictions

a knife rusted before its first use

Because in the barest of rooms, nothing is comprehensible

Neither fanatic nor mystic

Because the first weeks of September came and went and the weather held

Not woven by innocent hands

Because this stasis is preparation

Because you’re deceased, maimed or in Philadelphia

 

"
"

I am forced to sleepwalk much of the time.

We hold on to these old ways, are troubled

sometimes and then the geyser goes away,

time gutted. In and of itself there is

no great roar, force pitted against force that

makes up in time what it loses in speed.

The waterfalls, the canyon, a royal I-told-you-so

comes back to greet us at the beginning.

How was your trip? Oh I didn’t last

you see, folded over like the margin

of a dream of the thing-in-itself. Well, and

what have we come to? A paper-thin past,

just so, and ‘tis pity. We regurgitate

old anthems and what has come to pass, and why

dwell on these. Why make things more difficult

than they already are? Because if it’s boring

in a different way, that’ll be interesting too.

That’s what I say.

 

That rascal, he jumped over the fence.

I’m wiping my pince-nez now. Did you ever hear from

the one who said he’d be back once it was over,

who eluded me even in my sleep? That was a particularly

promising time, we thought. Now the sun’s out

and it’s raining again. Just like a day from

the compendium. I’ll vouch for you,

and we can go on scrolling as though nothing had risen,

the horizon forest looks back at us. The preacher

shook his head, the evangelist balanced two spools

at the end of his little makeshift rope. We’d gone too far.

We’d have to come back in a day or so.

"
"







after Tafisha Edwards







To disappear Black girls at a low volume of sustained public panic is to insinuate the inconstancy of Black girls. The disposability of Black girls who are prone to disappearance. A body bag somewhere waits with little hoopla about its lot. Absence becomes the lot of Black girls.


 


_________ will eventually accept as fact that absence becomes a lot of Black girls. In what becomes the normal day-to-day, Black girls are harder to find, _________ would think first, not that there are few attempts to find them. The question isn’t whether Black girls often go missing. If no one else, Black girls miss each other.


 


_________  would be remiss to not recognize how everything is made less in the absence of Black girls, if _________ could miss what _________ have never been required to recognize, such as:


 


Unlike missing Black girls, taking Black girls is a Western custom. It seems likely that such a statement will soon appear inaccurate: the white space in new textbook editions will have nothing to say about it, if the white spaces behind those textbooks have anything to say about it. That Black girls are quintessential American palimpsests is not a question but an anxiety. _________ would rather forget that Black girls were made receptacles for what the authors of Liberty and Independence would not speak. That Liberty and Independence were imaginable only in the absent-presence of taken Black girls, enslaved Black girls, Black girls on whom a foundational economic system so depended that white men would kill each other and take taken Black girls.


 


The constancy of Black girls is someone’s anxiety. The soil is thick with hidden Black girls, the myth that only quiet Black girls are worthwhile Black girls. The soil turns as _________  turn away from loud Black girls and their cacophonic insistence on Black girls.


 


_________ have not insisted enough upon the fact of Black girls, are often loudly shocked to find Black girls disappeared. Loud, unsustainable shock has a way of disappearing Black girls. Outrage, too, has a way of being disappeared.

"
"

The first step is to stop just beyond the weight of organs.

The sense of gravity sitting in tissue is like the space between

carcass and curb, before the reek worms into rock pores:

a sleeplessness there, that continual niche-trash. You too

 

once knew what it was to feel impressive. As the bed dissolves

into the walls, the walls disrobe themselves of their edges

and your resolve is now acute in the locking jaw of darkness.

Beg to be let. You, like bravery, leave behind the breath-inflated

 

lump, its depths, and its refusal to lace the cells of scars over even

the metaphorical guttings. To manage the act exceeds the box-

and-whisker of lately’s along-going. You’ve grown so accustomed

to mereness that what you call a life no longer houses the sublime.

 

It seems easy to leave. It seems this easy to leave. After

a second you’ll want to consider the centimeters of resistance

stitching air between here and all of elsewhere. But, still,

inhabit the bodiless second. To possess it is a bearable joy.

"
"

Let the blood if your belly must have it, but let it

not be of me and mine. Let my momma sleep.

Let her pray. Let them eat. Let the reverend’s

devil pass over me. Let the odds at least

acknowledge us. Let the breasts be intact,

the insulin faithfully not far, and let the deep

red pinpoint puddle its urgency on a pricked

fingertip. Let the nurse find the vein the first time.

 

Let the kerosene flow and let my grandma praise

her bedside lord for letting her miss another winter.

Let me be just a little bit bitter so I remember:

Your columns and borders aint but the fractured,

the broke clean, the brownest gouges in the blades

of our great-great-great-shoulders. Let me leave

and come back when my chest opens for you wider

than your ditches did to engorge my placeless body.

 

The mosquito-thick breath in your throat coats my skin

and it almost feels as if you love me. Let the AC

drown out the TV. Let the lotion bottle keep a secret

corner til Friday. Let Ike, Wan, D-Block, all my brother’s

brothers ride through the weekend. Let the cop car

swerve its nose into night and not see none of them.

Let us smell rain. Let the breeze through an oak hymn

the promise that keeps us waking. Let the cicada

unwind while hushpuppy steam slips out the knot

of a tourist’s hand, and let him hear in it legends

of how hot grease kept the hounds and the lash at bay.

 

"
"

Tagus, farewell, that westward, with thy streams,

Turns up the grains of gold already tried,

With spur and sail for I go seek the Thames,

Gainward the sun that show'th her wealthy pride,

And to the town which Brutus sought by dreams,

Like bended moon doth lend her lusty side.

My King, my Country, alone for whom I live,

Of mighty love the wings for this me give.

"
"

Strange to remember a visit, really not so

Long ago, which now seems, finally, past.   Always, it’s a

Kind of obvious thing I guess, amazed by that

Cycle: that first you anticipate a thing & it seems

Far off, the distance has a weight you can feel

Hanging on you, & then it’s there – that

Point – whatever – which, now, while

It’s happening seems to be constantly slipping away,

“Like the sand through your fingers in an old movie,” until

You can only look back on it, & yet you’re still there, staring

At your thoughts in the window of the fire you find yourself before.

We’ve gone over this a thousand times: & here again, combing that

Same section of beach or inseam for that – I’m no

Longer sure when or exactly where – “& yet” the peering,

Unrewarding as it is, in terms of tangible results,

Seems so necessary.

 

Hope, which is, after all, no more than a splint of thought

Projected outwards, “looking to catch” somewhere –

What can I say here? – that the ease or

Difficulty of such memories doesn’t preclude

“That harsher necessity” of going on always in

A new place, under different circumstances:

& yet we don’t seem to have changed, it’s

As if these years that have gone by are

All a matter of record, “but if the real

Facts were known” we were still reeling from

What seems to have just happened, but which,

“By the accountant’s keeping” occurred years.

Ago.   Years ago.   It hardly seems possible,

So little, really, has happened.

 

We shore ourselves hour by hour

In anticipation that soon there will be

Nothing to do.   “Pack a sandwich

& let’s eat later.”   And of course,

The anticipation is quite appropriate, accounting,

For the most part, for whatever activity

We do manage.    Eternally buzzing over the time,

Unable to live in it…

 

“Maybe if we go upaways we can get a better

View.”   But, of course, in that sense, views don’t

Improve.   “In the present moment” (if we could only see

It, which is to say, to begin with, stop looking with

Such anticipation) what is enfolding before us puts to

Rest any necessity for “progression”.

 

So, more of these tracings, as if by some magic

Of the phonetic properties of these squiggles…   Or

Does that only mystify the “power” of “presence"" which

Is, as well, a sort of postponement. 

 

"
"

My economy is circular: I earn money from an institution that owns most of

the businesses where I tend to spend most of my money.

 

My economy is quasi-medieval, trade-centered, and guild-like.

 

My economy is not canonical.

 

My economy is a misfortune that recently befell me.

 

My economy admits foundational narratives.

 

My economy is language.

 

My economy is the executioner’s reversal of fortune.

 

My economy has no essential features.

 

My economy admits parallax critiques of ideology.

 

My economy owes something to over 4,136 dead soldiers.

 

My economy does not intimate and would rather not split hairs about what

belongs to whom.

 

My economy can’t stay out of things, but can’t make it into the thick of

things either.

 

My economy has questionable purchasing power.

 

My economy has no surrogate.

 

My economy has no interpretative skills but is rife with interpretative communi-

ties.

 

My economy is of trees chopped down in Brooklyn, and the gradual encir-

cling of brick.

 

My economy is the new red.

 

My economy thrives on shades of gray.

 

My economy is an unremarkable tuna sandwich that is missing the slices of

tomato that I had asked for.

 

My economy is a liter bottle of Poland Spring water coming not from

Poland but from Maine and bought at a university cafeteria in Uptown

Manhattan where there are quite a number of water foundations that deliver

water with a funky metallic aftertaste.

 

My economy is a poem called “First Purchase of the Month” consisting of

two stanzas with six eight-word lines each within a larger poem that could

be endless but won’t be:

 

                                 Could’ve been an outfit for the Whitney Biennial

                                  

                                 Couldn’t afford one, nor did I need it.

 

                                 Who cares how you look at the zoo;

 

                                 it’s about the animals, stupid. Which reminds me,

 

                                 could’ve been the trail mix I snacked on

 

                                 & which I managed not to purchase myself.

 

 

                                 It was tuna on whole wheat, lettuce, jalapeños;

 

                                 a one liter bottle of water (Poland Spring.)

 

                                 Asked for tomato too, which the lady forgot.

 

                                 You Puerto Rican, she asked? Don’t think so,

 

                                 said another one in Spanish. Let me answer.

 

                                 No, what made you think so? The peppers?

 

 

My economy needs contractions and abbreviations.

 

My economy is not fixed.

 

My economy is broken, mispronounced.

 

My economy has cold feet, even if there are plenty of socks at home.

 

My economy would like to be wholesome and sound.

 

My economy is a gift certificate that is not enough for what I’d like to have,

so I end up spending money at a store that I dislike in the first place and

will never visit again.

 

My economy is a business lunch where I end up paying the bill instead of

the person who’d like me to work with her.

 

My economy consists of performing tasks for which I receive no quantifi-

able pay.

 

My economy grows when it’s enough to buy someone else a drink, or a

meal.

 

My economy does not allow me to say no.

 

My economy pretends to be booming, but instead, is shaky and imploding.

 

It doesn’t matter, because my economy is predicated on virtue, and it posits

that it’s purer than yours.

 

My economy has no exchange value.

 

I’d like to think of my economy as one of resistance and tactical difference.

 

My economy is not a disposable good.

 

There are no surpluses in my economy.

 

I already owe what I just wrote.

 

My economy is derivative, parasitical, and residual.

 

My economy is a hand-me-down.

 

My economy is not environmentally friendly, although it’s not ravaging

non-renewable resources either.

 

My economy doesn’t force me to put my money where my mouth is. Were I

to pay for what I say, it would be a different story.

 

Thirteen cents a word is not fair trade.

 

My economy mistakes what it means to trade in futures.

 

In theory my economy is not the result of deliberate choice, it is makeshift

and a tag-along.

 

My economy has double standards.

 

My economy has attention deficit disorder.

 

My economy is the symptom of an incurable disease.

 

My economy is not even mine.

 

 

Word count: 682

 

"
"

The tide pool crumples like a woman

into the smallest version of herself,

bleeding onto whatever touches her.

 

The ocean, I mean, not a woman, filled

with plastic lace, and closer to the vanishing

point, something brown breaks  the surface—human,

 

maybe, a hand or foot or an island

of trash—but no, it’s just a garden of kelp.

A wild life.

 

This is a prayer like the sea

urchin is a prayer, like the sea

star is a prayer, like the otter and cucumber—

 

as if I know what prayer means. 

 

I call this the difficulty of the non-believer,

or, put another way, waking, every morning, without a god. 

 

How to understand, then, what deserves rescue

and what deserves to suffer.

 

Who.

 

Or should I say, what must

be sheltered and what abandoned. 

 

Who.

 

I might ask you to imagine a young girl,

no older than ten but also no younger,

on a field trip to a rescue. Can you 

 see her? She is lead to the gates that separate

the wounded sea lions from their home and the class.

How the girl wishes this measure of salvation for herself:

 

to claim her own barking voice, to revel

in her own scent and sleek brown body, her fingers

woven into the cyclone fence.

 

"
"

I hate the word, and I guess that’s why it is said?

People love to hurt one another.

It is what makes us human.

I do love dogs.

They don’t seem to be evil unless humans make them that way.

Dogs can maul and they can sniff out bombs.

They’ll get as close to you as they can while you’re sleeping.

They’ll share heat and scent in the crook of your knees.

Is there really a thing such as innocence?

I have desired from birth to live.

Daily, I wrestle the tight arms of guilt.

At the shelter, the adoption coach told us that our new dog was highly food motivated.

I have been called a bitch.

Our dog trembles when he’s afraid and the only thing we can do is wait for the fear to leave.

There’s no comforting him.

In a dream they held me down, scrawled BITCH across my chest in old embers.

They covered my head as a weapon was raised.

I had a dog who once kept me from walking into the arroyo.

She blocked my path and wouldn’t move.

I’ll never know what, or who, she saved me from.

 

"
"

It will be windy for a while until it isn’t. The waves will shoal. A red-legged

cormorant will trace her double along glassy water, forgetting they are hungry.

The sea will play this motif over and over, but there will be no preparing for it

otherwise. Water will quiver in driftwood. Sound preceding absence,

a white dog trailing a smaller one: ghost and noon shadow, two motes

disappearing into surf. And when the low tide comes lapping and clear, the curled

fronds of seaweed will furl and splay, their algal sisters brushing strands

against sands where littleneck clams feed underwater. Light rain will fall

and one cannot help but lean into the uncertainty of the sea. Bow: a knot

of two loops, two loose ends, our bodies on either side of this shore where we

will dip our hands to feel what can’t be seen. Horseshoe crabs whose blue

blood rich in copper will reach for cover, hinged between clouds and

sea. It will never be enough, the bull kelp like a whip coiling in tender hands,

hands who know to take or be taken, but take nothing with them: I will marry you.

I will marry you. So we can owe what we own to every beautiful thing.

 

"
"

at night you stumble, dreaming

cross-eyed of a chase scene

three yellow wasps on your chest

the city you turned around in

a chase that quickly lands into a fight

 

the nagging anxiety of a stain somewhere

a tickle at the back of the throat

a song’s bridge playing over and over in the head

maybe the stain is at the bottom of your lung

maybe this white crusting along the edge of the bed

 

I lay an icepack on your head

one of the old ones that look like a lazy waterdrop

unable to pop, I’m waiting for a more complete

courage, a peeled orange, a halogen lamp

 

believe it or not, we’re recreating someone

from the 19th century’s sin, by proceeding

mounted on the edge of our bed like

a permanent display, matching burdens

to caramels

 

the thin plant over the dresser is belonging here

you picture yourself with pedals removed

and ask why you were not born gracious

I do a different dance in the same mirror

 

in the ultra-rendering of these buildings

I could snap my fingers

and every window would close

an accordion we accompany

 

"
"

i had scarcely got acquainted

when they took me by the paw & made me even-minded

nor did i mind

i had exactly enough window

i had exactly enough to get started

wine makes a person weak

that is not to say that wine is not delightful, only

that it makes a person weak

a person can be made weak with whiskey

and this was the mexicans’ military tactic

with the chiricahua apache

and the dutch with the lenape down in manahatta

there was a dog named charlie

cally called it an ‘it’

when we had our pronoun circle-jerk

i told the group they could call me ‘it’

you know like the sky and the grass and

a bird where you can’t tell what it is

it, its, itself

but then i sort of chickened out and said

if ‘it’ ‘made them feel weird’ as a pronoun for a human

they could call me ‘they’

or any gender-neutral pronoun i said

xe or zae or e or shim-sham or

two head-cocks and a click i joked

looking at charlie’s belly as charlie

rolled on its back

 

"
"

Seventeen suns rising in seventeen bedroom windows. Thirty-four eyes blooming open with the light of one more morning. Seventeen reflections in the bathroom mirror. Seventeen backpacks or briefcases stuffed with textbooks or lesson plans. Seventeen good mornings at kitchen breakfasts and seventeen goodbyes at front doors. Seventeen drives through palm-lined streets and miles of crammed highways to Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School at 5901 Pine Island Road. The first bell ringing-in one last school day on February fourteenth, 2018. Seventeen echoes of footsteps down hallways for five class periods: algebra, poetry, biology, art, history. Seventeen hands writing on whiteboards or taking notes at their desks until the first gunshot at 2:21pm. One AR-15 rifle in the hands of a nineteen year old mind turning hate for himself into hate for others, into one-hundred fifty bullets fired in six minutes through building number twelve. Seventeen dead carried down hallways they walked, past cases of trophies they won, flyers for clubs they belonged to, lockers they won’t open again. Seventeen Valentine’s Day dates broken and cards unopened. Seventeen bodies to identify, dozens of photo albums to page through and remember their lives. Seventeen caskets and burial garments to choose for them. Seventeen funerals to attend in twelve days. Seventeen graves dug and headstones placed—all marked with the same date of death. Seventeen names: Alyssa. Helena. Scott. Martin—seventeen absentees forever—Nicholas. Aaron. Jamie. Luke—seventeen closets to clear out—Christopher. Cara. Gina. Joaquin—seventeen empty beds—Alaina. Meadow. Alex. Carmen. Peter—seventeen reasons to rebel with the hope these will be the last seventeen to be taken by one of three-hundred-ninety-three-million guns in America.

"
"

     AUTUMN

gold of amber

red of ember

brown of umber

all September

      MCCOY CREEK

 

Over the bright shallows

now no flights of swallows.

Leaves of the sheltering willow

dangle thin and yellow.

 

     OCTOBER

 

At four in the morning the west wind

moved in the leaves of the beech tree

with a long rush and patter of water,

first wave of the dark tide coming in.

 

     SOLSTICE

 

On the longest night of all the year

in the forests up the hill,

the little owl spoke soft and clear

to bid the night be longer still.

 

     THE WINDS OF MAY

 

are soft and restless

in their leafy garments

that rustle and sway

making every moment movement.

 

     HAIL

 

The dogwood cowered under the thunder

and the lilacs burned like light itself

against the storm-black sky until the hail

whitened the grass with petals.

 

 

"
"

Bibiana:At night I dreamt that I belonged to a basement-flock of girls just as terrified and feverish as me. We could communicate with each other byknocking on the walls. 

 

"
"

Bibiana:Wanting to get close to one’s abuser is no sickness. Wanting to create

a cocoon of normalcy when one is subjected to a crime is no syndrome."
"

Will haul this gelatinous body, will lash forward this non-form, will push this organism of gas through the gray regions.


 


A sour wind tears through the thin white hair. A wind of vinegar and henbane tears in the rustling, discarded bird-shells that were abandoned empty and fragile when the throbbing bird-boils moved on toward so-called life. Now I see the cunning needle-trees sling these clumps of heavy pouch-flesh back and forth between them: small feather-birds “fly” above my heads.


 


I haul myself, I haul myself, I haul my dragging structure along the river furrow’s muddy, sloppily overlapping slopes. I am so bitter, so wet, so the mouth smears the inside with the sweetness of the chewed-up blood-chisel. Out of this blood I am going to suck my nourishment for some time.


 


I haul, I urge my dissolved substance, slowly forward across the metal of calm stones, the hovering thread-glue’s suction toward a point in the distant middle of the perspective. Where the river’s banks will meet and like the thinnest needle of silver of liquid will drill its dark tunnel-water straight into the heart of the dying image, this moistly broken-up surface of paper to which we cling.


 


I haul I haul I touch myself, touch the skin-rind with chafed-up viscous fingers. Little mermaid from ocean foam molded–I haul my long veils, layers of elastic cartilage, of slippery, shimmering membranes, chlorophyll. The gills shudder and glow deep down in this chasm of tissue–constantly rustling, squeaking, gasping for air. This whirling, howling, desperate lack of oxygen; the scream–if it had had enough oxygen to scream and a mouth with which to scream–the scream to swallow the entire lung full of clear wind.


 


Lizards play, glitter green, blue, and red between the skin membranes of the body dress. Where does this mass end? I search inward through strata to find the core of my plasma wet from juices, to find the core of body-flesh despite the outer, surrounding flesh, the naked body’s stable surface, a kind of human here inside the bluing, plant-becoming. Something to hold on to behind the spread of the sickness of mud, fermentation. But there is nothing to grasp beneath this mantle of slippery webbed skin, burst through by a pounding net of veins.


 


I now lick my tongue against the outer claws of the fingers to tear life into the ions, to make sores bitter in the tongue’s blue ventricles. A kind of pain therefore radiates against the inner glands, a faint spasm of cheers before this, the nervous system’s last chance to communicate with the dying I. The mists smart, shimmer, the lumps of blue cobalt from the mustard gas corrode through the otherwise red shroud-clouds that drag their bellies against the river’s surface. In one of the skin-folds between the pockets of the genital dress, lizards gather in heaps of glimmering scales.


 


But time runs on time and starvation and the weakness carries me in across the gray regions. And the soul’s dark night will slowly be lowered through me. That is why I now slowly fold myself like a muscle against the wet clay to press the flesh against the sleep-gland’s mouths. I will sleep now in my bird body in the down, and a bitter star will radiate eternally above the glowing face’s watercourse.

"
"

Behind the house in a field

there's a metal box I buried

full of childhood treasure, a map

of my secret place, a few lead pennies

from 1943.

The rest I've forgotten,

forgotten even the exact spot

I covered with moss and loam.

 

Now I'm back and twenty years

have made so little difference

I suspect they never happened,

this face in the mirror

aged with pencil and putty.

I suspect even

the box has moved as a mole would move

to a new place long ago.

"
"

I have scrawled audible lifelines along the edges

of the lint trap, dropping the ball of towel fuzz

in the blue bin lined with a thirteen-gallon bag.

My sons' wardrobes lounge on their bedroom floors,

then sidle down to the basement, where I look

forward to the warmth of their waistbands

when I pluck them from the dryer.

Sometimes I wonder why my husband

worries about debt and I wish he wouldn't.

Sometimes I wonder how high the alfalfa

will grow. Sometimes I wonder if the dog

will throw up in the night. Like my mother,

I'm learning not to tamper with anger.

It appears as reliably as the washing machine

thumps and threatens to lurch across the floor

away from the electrical outlet. Nothing's worth

getting worked up about, except for death.

And when I think of the people I have lost,

I wish them back into their button-down shirts,

their raspberry tights.

"
"

Years do odd things to identity.

What does it mean to say

I am that child in the photograph

at Kishamish in 1935?

Might as well say I am the shadow

of a leaf of the acacia tree

felled seventy years ago

moving on the page the child reads.

Might as well say I am the words she read

or the words I wrote in other years,

flicker of shade and sunlight

as the wind moves through the leaves.

 

"
"

Mother rain, manifold, measureless,

falling on fallow, on field and forest,

on house-roof, low hovel, high tower,

downwelling waters all-washing, wider

than cities, softer than sisterhood, vaster

than countrysides, calming, recalling:

return to us, teaching our troubled

souls in your ceaseless descent

to fall, to be fellow, to feel to the root,

to sink in, to heal, to sweeten the sea.

 

"
"

Up on the roof, waiting for the fireworks to begin

in warm winter rain, a moment ago I stepped

from the elevator into the black air

of an almost New Year

and need a minute to catch my breath

at the spread of city open to my eye.

I can't go to the edge; I never could.

The old fear of height still troubles me,

the sensation that nothing can be under me

if I am surrounded by mist and rain

and all of the dark night air we breathe.

Even a glimpse at the treetops in the park,

with its slick crisscrossing roads that plunge

into the jumbled panorama of East Side Manhattan,

hysterical tonight with its own incandescence,

gives me the willies. I feel as if

I were standing on the deck of a showboat of a cloud

as it drifts down some dark river, waiting for it

to bang into some other building's fifteenth floor.

How can these old people hunch the railing,

hoisting their plastic glasses of champagne

from under dripping umbrellas, as if

they drank the rain as they laugh

their analyses of the weather?

Maybe now, like me, they have nothing to lose.

I moved in three weeks ago; this is my first trip

to the roof. I don't want to die tonight,

the first fatality of 1990! There's too much of me

I left in pieces last year, oh, the whole last decade:

But I'm up here to distract myself, temporarily,

from what I don't want or can't have

in the way of love. . . . That must be

the Triborough Bridge, tied in its strings

of blue lights, and I can see in Central Park

the skating rink, like a scoured mirror below,

where some madman waves a red lantern; he

must be drunk. I have only sipped a speck of Drambuie,

which I didn't carry in my Coca-Cola glass

up to these festivities. This is the first New Year's

I've spent alone in twenty, twenty-two years.

I never could go to the edge; but I did.

Out there in the dark: my marriage, the woman

I loved badly, as she did me, or none too well;

the places we lived; the apartment I once half-owned;

the thousands of books I had to leave behind

(though I am to be granted library privileges)

and the black and white cat I really miss.

My wife's with her friends tonight somewhere in Brooklyn;

friends of mine out there, too, though I don't know

where. It's just like me to move in the middle

of a telephone company strike. Thus, no calls

from anyone—and I don't even have

a telephone yet, so who could call? Damp but trying

to smile, I eye the revelers. Two young men

and their enormous girlfriends have joined us,

really large women who carry balloons, all ready

to froth in merry champagne. We check

our watches to the screams from swarms

of apartment windows to the west

as the sky lights up with the first furious

bombardment of colored shells. I can see that

red lantern swinging toward the rockets—aha!

So it wasn't a drunk, but the fireworks engineer

preparing to blow the year's last sky

to smithereens for our delight!

I like to follow the tiny spurts of flame

from the launching pad in their heavenward trajectory

as much as I like the rockets' red glare,

the bombs bursting in air, which give proof

to the night that I am still here, hands

jammed in the pockets of my sodden raincoat,

face dripping with rain, hat soaked, wondering

if the skinny guy in the army jacket behind me

(who looks just like I did in the sixties)

is mumbling his way into a combat flashback

and ready to hurl me over the edge of the roof

and into kingdom come. I guess not yet. We've

survived the first blasts of spinning green,

corkscrews of spangled flame, buds of fireballs

spewed in arching gold sprays, the whistling fire-fish

that curl and howl as they flare, falling to ash.

Screaming its head off, the New York New Year enters.

I feel sad that beautiful things must die,

even shadows made of smoke and flame,

whatever I thought I had made out of my life—

music, poems, books, kisses, a little useless fame.

The army guy behind me grumbles at the haze

of rocket smoke that coils around the trees,

then tumbles up into the air toward Harlem.

That bump and thud and bump sound everywhere,

more clouds smacking each other head-on.

The flashes of the explosions are close enough

to touch if you wanted to burn your fingers

on the sky, and the glare rocks our shadows back

against the brick, as if chaos snapped

our pictures in the dark. I smile for my portrait,

curious at the New Year, smelling the acrid smoke

of the one we've just destroyed. Then I squeeze into

the tiny elevator car with the others, anonymous,

reconciled to be so, back to my little apartment

and the waiting glass of amber drink I'll raise,

only half in jest, to my new life.

"
"







For Rebecca Feldman and Brian Roessler







That's what the first line says

of the song I've been playing all summer

at the keyboard—trying to get my hands

around its dark, melancholy chords,

its story line of a melody that twists

up like snakes from melodic minor scales

that I've also been trying to learn, though

I'm no great shakes as a practicer of scales.

Come to think of it, neither am I much

when it comes to love—no great shakes, I mean.

Not that I haven't had my chances.

Twenty years married, I made a lousy husband,

half asleep, selfish, more like a big baby

than a grown man, the poet laureate

of the self-induced coma when it came to

doing anything for anybody but me.

""Now and then he took his thumb

out of his mouth to write an ode to

or a haiku about the thumb he sucked all day.""

That's what I imagined my ex-wife said

to our therapist near the end. She did say:

""It's all about Bill."" She was right.

And suddenly it frightens me, remembering

how, at our wedding, our poet friends

read poems of (mostly) utter depression

to salute us. I wondered if their griefs in love

had double-crossed our union, if strange

snakes in the grass of our blissful Eden

had hissed at us, and now I worry,

on your wedding day, if I'm not

doing the same damned thing . . . .

I haven't come to spring up and put my curse

on your bliss. Here's what I want to say:

You're young. You don’t know what love is.

And as the next line of the song goes, you won't

—""Until you know the meaning of the blues.""

Darlings, the blues will come (though not

often, I hope) to raise their fiery swords

against your paradise. A little of that

you unwittingly got today, when it rained

and you couldn't be married outside under

the beautiful tree in Nan and Alan's yard.

But paradise doesn't have to be structured

so that we can never reenter it. After

you've kicked each other out of it

once or twice (I'm speaking metaphorically,

of course), teach yourself how to say

a few kind words to each other.

Don't stand there angry, stony.

Each of you let the other know

what you are feeling and thinking

and then it may be possible

to return to each other smiling,

hand in hand. For arm in arm,

you are your best Eden. Remember

the advice the old poet sang to you

on the afternoon of August 4, 2001,

the day you got married.

May you enjoy a good laugh

thinking of him and his silver thumb

now that you've turned the key

into your new life in the beautiful

Massachusetts rain and—hey, now—sun!

"
"

Not long after you had told me, gently,

that you still grieved for your last love,

though that had ended almost a year before,

and that you could have no intimate relationship

with me, maybe not with anyone for a time,

I stopped my fork in the air with whatever hung

on the end of it that I was eating.

My throat wouldn't swallow.

I felt weak and sick, as if it were myself

that I devoured, piece by piece, as you talked away

the hopes that I had put in your lovely face.

It was the old story coming true for me once more,

though you were hardly mine. . . .

When we finished I walked you back to your car;

I don't remember having much to say.

Why would I? Buildings drifted by,

and cars, and faces. Then we arrived at the place

where, afterwards, I would never see you again,

at a parking lot near Times Square.

There I marked the sidewalk with X's

visible only to me: ""At this place

I was lost again,"" they'd say to me

when I walked there in the future.

""Dig here and find what's left of me,

or what I left behind, where X marks the spot.""

I felt like the death's-head and crossed bones

that surmount the treasure chest.

I only felt a little like gold coins and jewels.

I have signed the City with these sphinxes

—in parks, in streets, in bedrooms,

in my own apartments. And there we stood,

you and I, hemmed in by the stitches of X's

that could not hold you to me. But X's

mean kisses, I realized, as well as

what is lost: all the kisses I couldn't give you

chalked like symbols on the sidewalk.

After all, you yourself had been marked

by loss, even in your laughter that afternoon

at the show I had taken you to. Bright-eyed

and smiling in the seat beside me, you

stole my glances with your dark, dark eyes

and your long hair. I thought that I had not been

this happy in a long time with a woman

and was ready to become even more happy,

ready to do anything that you wanted

in order to please you, to see that smile come up,

not knowing what you were soon to say to me

as we dined. And when you spoke,

I felt life fall away from me. Again I felt

that I would never be happy. I felt the words

that I had wanted to say to you leaving me, rushing

out of my chest like dead air, until I had no more words

to say. I seemed to cut and swallow my food

as if it were me myself that stuck in pieces

on the end of the fork I had raised to my mouth.

Had I been chewing on my own flesh?

Self-Pity the Devourer took me by the hand

that held the fork, and once again I feasted

on all that was dark and hopeless in myself,

in lieu of all that was beautiful, desirable,

and unattainable in you. And then

I stood beside you in the lot where you

had parked your car, with the X's buzzing

in the air, sticking themselves to you

and me and the blacktop and the cars.

When you reached out to embrace me, I

moved to embrace you in return—and then came

the part that I don't want to remember,

the part I hate: I caught a glimpse of your

face as we put our arms around each other,

and your face said everything to me about

how you had wasted the afternoon, how eager

you were to speed away in your car, a mixture

of disgust and relief that the thing would soon

be over, that I would be crossed out forever

from your life—and everything that I hated

about myself, my stupid chin, my ugly nose,

my hopeless balded head, my stuck-out ears,

my wreck of a heart, crashed over me,

spinning me into the vortex of a palpable self-hate

that I have only ever let myself feel

a little bit at a time, though it is always there

"
"

like the lost car that a river knows

like the heat of an ointment in pinpoints of breathing

like the unknown western in mountains of tar

like a knot in each word for comfort

like a horse on a face with four hooves

like the knives that a heart squirms into

like the feel that the last day pushes, that a fire paints red

like the shower that a plain divides in snakes

like a frozen torso pining for food

like the ammunition that a pair of wings makes dry

like a shirt that plants seeds under worn out skin

like the clouds of mistakes, pouring through sleep

like the walls that crack open

like a wake in a spin

like the exits of oceans that a salmon knows

like the dust that is written with number

like a trust full of beacons of light

like the negative shade of a fungus

like the promise that a lie gives out

like the pulse of a trap

like the rainbow that cuts off a hand

like a psychic intent full of negative calls

like salt for the season that covers the fields with jail

like the round word that a star pisser pulls

like the plains that a crossed out calendar day will mourn

like the fate of the wrong side of talking

like hills under snow that a letter revolves

like the husky reflections of leeches that writhe

like a sword in Toledo

like the animals growing a vent in a cage

like the sequence of nights dropping straw for a cipher

like the trade in the fair full of cycles and ends

like the cattle that heat all the drains with green grass

like the nipples of outdoor intentions

like a wing on the door that a glass makes arise

like the underground fluid of digitized words

like the ice in a cavern

like a ride through the green light of dying

like the yellowish herd of relational cards

like the face that a wallet becomes

like the wrong line of radios making a rule

like the crust on the last day of hunger

like the rodeo riding the real for a cut

like the cells in the spread of the fall

like an ape for the circle of color

like reflections that turn on a wheel

like the freezer of sweethearts

like a change for the current that makes a return

like the pause on the shore full of rattles

like the oxygen tent making holes in a lung

the face

of friendly fire

is knotted

for a smile

deleted

for a smile

that saves

the executioner

the face

intended

jail, by rocking

through the holes

that fear

the clear blue

family

of dots

the face

resembles

next to nothing

in the network

full of incremental

touches

that a string

intends to limit

by the light

the face

of arctic

evolutions, a hunt

that people came

to read

instead of mapping

all the flights

of sleep

without a sound

the face

of terrible returns

will fade

outside the pouring

crowd

of animal

relation

in the mineral

of wealth

the face

of providence

is making shores

for surfers

in the foam

of magnifying

eyes

that are the opposite

of winter calm

the face

is never there

in each intention

that the worst

reliance

knows to ask

for heat

the face

is after

every opening

that makes

a number

count

for all

of what is good

like a robot that falls and makes good for a switch

like the breasts of a mop that soaks blood

like a magnifying glass for the sun

like the picture of radar in space

like a misery flood on the phone

like electrical laughter that the pointed shake

like enemies held in a double embrace

like extinctions returning

like a handshake of style for the heat

like the flower that bottles a fly for a mouth

like the still dunes of dust on a beautiful girl

like the crack in an oven

like a moon that gets brighter with age

 

"
"







Like guns and cars, cameras


are fantasy-machines whose use is addictive.


—Susan Sontag




 







I place a photograph of my uncle on my computer desktop, which means I learn to ignore it. He stands by a tank, helmet tilting to his right, bootlaces tightened as if stitching together a wound. Alive the hand brings up a cigarette we won't see him taste. Last night I smoked one on the steps outside my barn apartment. A promise I broke myself. He promised himself he wouldn't and did. I smell my fingers and I am smelling his. Hands of smoke and gunpowder. Hands that promised they wouldn't, but did. 

This album is a stop-loss. By a dim lantern

or in the latrine

he flips through it.

He looks at himself

looking nearly as he does—

closest to himself then

as he could be, just learning

how to lean into his new body.

He suspends there

by standing order,

a spreading fire in his chest,

his groin. He is on stage

for us to see him, see him?

He stands in the noontime sun.

 

A young soldier (pictured above) the son of an imam, brother to six, is among the latest casualties in the military campaign of Susangerd. 

 

your whole body in a photo your whole body sitting on a crate pressing your eyesocket to the viewfinder of a bazooka crouched as you balance the metal tube on your shoulder in one you guide a belt of ammo into the untiring weapon proud your elbow out as if mid-waltz your frame strong and lightly supporting the gun a kind of smile ruining the picture 

You’re posing. You’re scared.

A body falls

and you learn to step over

a loosened head. You begin to appreciate

the heft of your boot soles,

how they propel you,

how they can kick in

a face–

the collapse

of a canopy bed

in an aerial bombardment,

mosquito netting doused

in napalm–cheekbones fragile

as moth wings beneath the heel.

You tighten your laces

until they hold together

a capable man.

Whatever rains,

the weight of your feet

swings you forward,

goose-stepping pendulums

a body less and less yours–

a body, God knows,

is not what makes you

anyway. So the hands

that said they never would

begin finding

grenade pins around their fingers,

begin flipping through this album

with soot under their nails

you were not ready

But they issued the shovel and the rifle and you dug

But to watch you sitting there between the sandbags

But to watch the sand spilling out the bullet holes

But what did they expect

But what did they really think a sheet of metal could prevent

But I sat rolling little ears of pasta off my thumb like helmets

But it was not a table of fallen men

But my hand registered fatigue

But the men in fatigues were tired of sleeping in shifts

But you snuck into town and dialed home until you wrote your fingers

       were tired

But the code for Shiraz was down

But all of Shiraz was down

But the sheet lightning above the Ferris wheel of rusted bolts

But I am sure they are alright you wrote Well to reassure yourself

But the wind like an old mouth shaking the unnamed evergreen outside

       my window

But what I mean is I'd like very much to talk a bitHello

 

 Operation Ramadan was an offensive in the Iran-Iraq War. It was launched by Iran in July 1982 near Basra and featured the use of human wave attacks in one of the largest land battles since World War II. Aftermath: The operation was the first of many disastrous offensives which cost thousands of lives on both sides. This one in general boosted the casualty limit up to 80,000 killed, 200,000 wounded, and 45,000 captured. In retrospect, the Iranians lacked effective command and control, air support, and logistics to sustain an attack in the first place. Saddam Hussein offered several ceasefire attempts in the following year, none of which were accepted by the Revolutionary regime. [6] [dead link] 

  Congratulations and condolences

They would sayThat's the house of a martyr

pointing with their noseThat's the mother of a martyr

They are building a museum

for the martyrs.

Some metal shelf

a white archival box

with his personal effects.

I am attempting my own

myth-making.He didn’t want to have 

anything"
"

Do not hang your head or clench your fists

when even your friend, after hearing the story,

says, My mother would never put up with that.

Fight the urge to rattle off statistics: that,

more often, a woman who chooses to leave

is then murdered. The hundredth time

your father says, But she hated violence,

why would she marry a guy like that?—"
"

When he tells the story now

he's at the center of it,

everyone else in the house

falling into the backdrop—

my mother, grandmother,

an uncle, all dead now—props

in our story: father and daughter

caught in memory's half-light.

I'm too young to recall it,

so his story becomes the story:

1969, Hurricane Camille

bearing down, the old house

shuddering as if it will collapse.

Rain pours into every room

and he has to keep moving,

keep me out of harm's way—

a father's first duty: to protect.

And so, in the story, he does:

I am small in his arms, perhaps

even sleeping. Water is rising

around us and there is no

higher place he can take me

than this, memory forged

in the storm's eye: a girl

clinging to her father. What

can I do but this? Let him

tell it again and again as if

it's always been only us,

and that, when it mattered,

he was the one who saved me.

"
"

1

In which I try to decipher

                          the story it tells,

this syntax of monuments                          flanking the old courthouse:

                                       here, a rough outline

like the torso of a woman                          great with child—                                       a steatite boulder from which                          the Indians girdled the core

                                                     to make of it a bowl,                                       and left in the stone a wound; here,

the bronze figure of Thomas Jefferson,                                       quill in hand, inscribing                          a language of freedom,                                                    a creation story—                                       his hand poised at the word                           happiness. There is not yet an ending,                                       no period—the single mark,

intended or misprinted, that changes                          the meaning of everything.

Here too, for the Confederacy,

                          an obelisk, oblivious

               in its name—a word                          that also meant the symbol

to denote, in ancient manuscripts,               the spurious, corrupt, or doubtful;

                                             at its base, forged                          in concrete, a narrative               of valor, virtue, states' rights. 

Here, it is only the history of a word,                          obelisk,               that points us toward                          what's not there; all of it

palimpsest, each mute object                repeating a single refrain:                Remember this.

"
"

To kill correctly

takes calculation.

 

Down to a science.

Arsenic

cacodylic acid.

 

Know water and rice

on a cellular level.

 

Make sure

no surviving

seed can be

collected

and planted.

 

Because even

a small seed

assures

survival.

 

Because

mortars,

grenades

and bombs

cannot destroy

a grain.

 

Because our

heart is made

of seeds.

 

Know what it

takes to kill

the seeds.

 

Know what it

takes to deprive

the plant of water,

to dehydrate it.

 

To be surrounded

by love but unable

to absorb it.

"
"

this morning

weaving Chi in the garden

invisible ball in my hand

 

 

*

 

 

Halong Bay

battle distant memory

smoke from Gulf of Tonkin

 

 

*

 

 

did the atom

ever know its destiny

how our hands create?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A student asked me,

“Why do your people

believe in dragons?”

 

 

*

 

 

river birch –

undressing

in the wind

 

 

*

 

 

the solid bones of elk antlers

or branches of a limber pine –

memory

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

bobcat with mange

unwatered plants

also dying

 

 

*

 

 

mountain lion

her land, before ours

invasive plants

 

 

*

 

 

scent of orange blossoms –

memories of my late grandma

who planted this tree

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

yarrow seedlings

pop up a week later –

each moment a small beginning

 

 

*

 

 

stopped in my tracks

by a primrose blooming –

I, too, will overcome this

 

 

*

 

 

dinner

a bowl of rice and soy sauce

food to survive on

 

 

*

 

 

my heart

the Santa Ana winds today

branches fall to the ground

 

"
"

       Thus, weary of life, in view of the great consummation which awaits us — tomorrow, we rush among our friends congratulating ourselves upon the joy soon to be. Thoughtless of evil we crush out the marrow of those about us with our heavy cars as we go happily from place to place. It seems that there is not time enough in which to speak the full of our exaltation. Only a day is left, one miserable day, before the world comes into its own. Let us hurry ! Why bother for this man or that ? In the offices of the great newspapers a mad joy reigns as they prepare the final extras. Rushing about, men bump each other into the whirring presses. How funny it seems. All thought of misery has left us. Why should we care ? Children laughingly fling themselves under the wheels of the street cars, airplanes crash gaily to the earth. Someone has written a poem.

 

       Oh life, bizarre fowl, what color are your wings ? Green, blue, red, yellow, purple, white, brown, orange, black, grey ? In the imagination, flying above the wreck of ten thousand million souls, I see you departing sadly for the land of plants and insects, already far out to sea. (Thank you, I know well what I am plagiarising) Your great wings flap as you disappear in the distance over the pre-Columbian acres of floating weed.

 

       The new cathedral overlooking the park, looked down from its towers today, with great eyes, and saw by the decorative lake a group of people staring curiously at the corpse of a suicide : Peaceful, dead young man, the money they have put into the stones has been spent to teach men of life’s austerity. You died and teach us the same lesson. You seem a cathedral, celebrant of the spring which shivers for me among the long black trees.

"
"

The farmer in deep thought

is pacing through the rain

among his blank fields, with

hands in pockets,

in his head

the harvest already planted.

A cold wind ruffles the water

among the browned weeds.

On all sides

the world rolls coldly away :

black orchards

darkened by the March clouds —

leaving room for thought.

Down past the brushwood

bristling by

the rainsluiced wagonroad

looms the artist figure of

the farmer — composing

— antagonist.

 

"
"

In passing with my mind

on nothing in the world

 

but the right of way

I enjoy on the road by

 

virtue of the law        —

I saw

 

an elderly man who

smiled and looked away

 

to the north past a house —

a woman in blue

 

who was laughing and

leaning forward to look up

 

into the man’s half

averted face

 

and a boy of eight who was

looking at the middle of

 

the man’s belly

at a watchchain —

 

The supreme importance

of this nameless spectacle

 

sped me by them

without a word —

 

Why bother where I went ?

for I went spinning on the

 

four wheels of my car

along the wet road until

 

I saw a girl with one leg

over the rail of a balcony

"
"

Of death

the barber

the barber

talked to me

 

cutting my

life with

sleep to trim

my hair —

 

It’s just

a moment

he said, we die

every night —

 

And of

the newest

ways to grow

hair on

 

bald death –

I told him

of the quartz

lamp

 

and of old men

with third

sets of teeth

to the cue

 

of an old man

who said

at the door —

Sunshine today!

 

for which

death shaves

him twice

a week

 

"
"

This is the time of year

when boys fifteen and seventeen

wear two horned lilac blossoms

in their caps — or over one ear

 

What is it that does this ?

 

It is a certain sort —

drivers for grocers or taxidrivers

white and colored —

 

fellows that let their hair grow long

in a curve over one eye — 

 

Horned purple

 

Dirty satyrs, it is

vulgarity raised to the last power

 

They have stolen them

broken the bushes apart

with a curse for the owner — 

 

Lilacs — 

 

They stand in the doorways

on the business streets with a sneer

on their faces

 

adorned with blossoms

 

Out of their sweet heads

dark kisses — rough faces

"
"

Somebody dies every four minutes

in New York State — 

 

To hell with you and your poetry — 

You will rot and be blown

through the next solar system

with the rest of the gases — 

 

What the hell do you know about it ?

 

AXIOMS

 

Do not get killed

 

Careful Crossing Campaign

Cross Crossings Cautiously

 

THE HORSES      black

                                 &

PRANCED             white

 

What’s the use of sweating over

this sort of thing, Carl ; here

it is all set up — 

 

Outings in New York City

 

Ho for the open country

 

Dont’t stay shut up in hot rooms

Go to one of the Great Parks

Pelham Bay for example

 

It’s on Long Island sound

with bathing, boating

tennis, baseball, golf, etc.

 

Acres and acres of green grass

wonderful shade trees, rippling brooks

 

               Take the Pelham Bay Park Branch

               of the Lexington Ave. (East Side)

               Line and you are there in a few

               minutes

 

Interborough Rapid Transit Co.

 

"
"

You tell me I am wrong.

Who are you, who is anybody to tell me I am wrong?

I am not wrong.

 

In Syracuse, rock left bare by the viciousness of Greek women,

No doubt you have forgotten the pomegranate trees in flower,

Oh so red, and such a lot of them.

 

Whereas at Venice,

Abhorrent, green, slippery city

Whose Doges were old, and had ancient eyes,

In the dense foliage of the inner garden

Pomegranates like bright green stone,

And barbed, barbed with a crown.

Oh, crown of spiked green metal

Actually growing!

 

Now, in Tuscany,

Pomegranates to warm your hands at;

And crowns, kingly, generous, tilting crowns

Over the left eyebrow.

 

And, if you dare, the fissure!

 

Do you mean to tell me you will see no fissure?

Do you prefer to look on the plain side?

 

For all that, the setting suns are open.

The end cracks open with the beginning:

Rosy, tender, glittering within the fissure.

 

Do you mean to tell me there should be no fissure?

No glittering, compact drops of dawn?

Do you mean it is wrong, the gold-filmed skin, integument,

            shown ruptured?

 

For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken.

It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack.

 

                                                                          San Gervasio in Tuscany

 

"
"

Would you like to throw a stone at me?

Here, take all that’s left of my peach.

 

Blood-red, deep:

Heaven knows how it came to pass.

Somebody’s pound of flesh rendered up.

 

Wrinkled with secrets

And hard with the intention to keep them.

 

Why, from silvery peach-bloom,

From that shallow-silvery wine-glass on a short stem

This rolling, dropping, heavy globule?

 

I am thinking, of course, of the peach before I ate it.

 

Why so velvety, why so voluptuous heavy?

Why hanging with such inordinate weight?

Why so indented?

 

Why the groove?

Why the lovely, bivalve roundnesses?

Why the ripple down the sphere?

Why the suggestion of incision?

 

Why was not my peach round and finished like a billiard ball?

It would have been if man had made it.

Though I’ve eaten it now.

 

But it wasn’t round and finished like a billiard ball;

And because I say so, you would like to throw something at me.

 

Here, you can have my peach stone.

                                                                                 San Gervasio

 

"
"

I love you, rotten,

Delicious rottenness.

 

I love to suck you out from your skins

So brown and soft and coming suave,

So morbid, as the Italians say.

 

What a rare, powerful, reminiscent flavour

Comes out of your falling through the stages of decay:

Stream within stream.

 

Something of the same flavour as Syracusan muscat wine

Or vulgar Marsala.

 

Though even the word Marsala will smack of preciosity

Soon in the pussy-foot West.

 

What is it?

What is it, in the grape turning raisin,

In the medlar, in the sorb-apple,

Wineskins of brown morbidity,

Autumnal excrementa;

What is it that reminds us of white gods?

 

Gods nude as blanched nut-kernels,

Strangely, half-sinisterly flesh-fragrant

As if with sweat,

And drenched with mystery.

 

Sorb-apples, medlars with dead crowns.

I say, wonderful are the hellish experiences,

Orphic, delicate

Dionysos of the Underworld.

 

A kiss, and a vivid spasm of farewell, a moment’s orgasm of rupture,

Then along the damp road alone, till the next turning.

And there, a new partner, a new parting, a new unfusing into twain,

A new gasp of further isolation,

A new intoxication of loneliness, among decaying, frost-cold leaves.

 

Going down the strange lanes of hell, more and more intensely alone,

The fibres of the heart parting one after the other

And yet the soul continuing, naked-footed, ever more vividly embodied

Like a flame blown whiter and whiter

In a deeper and deeper darkness,

Ever more exquisite, distilled in separation.

 

So, in the strange retorts of medlars and sorb-apples

The distilled essence of hell.

The exquisite odour of leave-taking. Jamque vale!

Orpheus, and the winding, leaf-clogged, silent lanes of hell.

 

Each soul departing with its own isolation.

Strangest of all strange companions,

And best.

 

Medlars, sorb-apples

More than sweet

Flux of autumn

Sucked out of your empty bladders

And sipped down, perhaps, with a sip of Marsala

So that the rambling, sky-dropped grape can add its music to yours,

Orphic farewell, and farewell, and farewell

And the ego sum of Dionysos

The sono io of perfect drunkenness

Intoxication of final loneliness.

                                                                                 San Gervasio

 

"
"

Who gave us flowers?Heaven? The white God?

 

Nonsense!

Up out of hell,

From Hades;

Infernal Dis!

 Jesus the god of flowers—?

Not he.Or sun-bright Apollo, him so musical?

Him neither.

 Who then?Say who.

Say it—and it is Pluto,

Dis

The dark one

Proserpine’s master.

 Who contradicts—?

 

When she broke forth from below,

Flowers came, hell-hounds on her heels.

Dis, the dark, the jealous god, the husband,

Flower-sumptuous-blooded.

 Go then, he said.

And in Sicily, on the meadows of Enna,

She thought she had left him;

But opened around her purple anemones,

Caverns,

Little hells of color, caves of darkness,

Hell, risen in pursuit of her; royal, sumptuous

Pit-falls.

 

All at her feet

Hell opening;

At her white ankles

Hell rearing its husband-splendid, serpent heads,

Hell-purple, to get at her—Why did he let her go?

So he could track her down again, white victim.

 

Ah mastery!

Hell’s husband-blossoms

Out on earth again.

 

Look out, Persephone!

You, Madame Ceres, mind yourself, the enemy is upon you.

About your feet spontaneous aconite,

Hell-glamorous, and purple husband-tyranny

Enveloping your late-enfranchised plains.

 

You thought your daughter had escaped?

No more stockings to darn for the flower-roots, down in hell?

But ah my dear!

 

Aha, the stripe-cheeked whelps, whippet-slim crocuses,At ’em, boys, at ’em!Ho golden-spaniel, sweet alert narcissus,Smell ’em, smell ’em out!

Those two enfranchised women.

 

Somebody is coming!Oho there!

 

Dark blue anemones!

Hell is up!

Hell on earth, and Dis within the depths!

 Run, Persephone, he is after you already.

 Why did he let her go?

To track her down;

All the sport of summer and spring, and flowers snapping

               at her ankles and catching her by the hair!

Poor Persephone and her rights for women.

 Husband-snared hell-queen,It is spring.

 

It is spring,

And pomp of husband-strategy on earth.

 Ceres, kiss your girl, you think you’ve got her back.The bit of husband-tilth she is,Persephone!

 

Poor mothers-in-law!

They are always sold.

 

It is spring.

 

                                                                                                     Taormina

 

"
"

When he pushed his bush of black hair off his brow:

When she lifted her mop from her eyes, and screwed it

            in a knob behind

            —O act of fearful temerity!

When they felt their foreheads bare, naked to heaven,

            their eyes revealed:

When they left the light of heaven brandished like a knife at

            their defenceless eyes

And the sea like a blade at their face,

Mediterranean savages:

When they came out, face-revealed, under heaven, from

            the shaggy undergrowth of their own hair

For the first time,

They saw tiny rose cyclamens between their toes, growing

Where the slow toads sat brooding on the past.

 

Slow toads, and cyclamen leaves

Stickily glistening with eternal shadow

Keeping to earth.

Cyclamen leaves

Toad-filmy, earth-iridescent

Beautiful

Frost-filigreed

Spumed with mud

Snail-nacreous

Low down.

 

The shaking aspect of the sea

And man’s defenceless bare face

And cyclamens putting their ears back.

 

Long, pensive, slim-muzzled greyhound buds

Dreamy, not yet present,

Drawn out of earth

At his toes.

 

Dawn-rose

Sub-delighted, stone engendered

Cyclamens, young cyclamens

Arching

Waking, pricking their ears

Like delicate very-young greyhound bitches

Half-yawning at the open, inexperienced

Vistas of day,

Folding back their soundless petalled ears.

 

Greyhound bitches

Bending their rosy muzzles pensive down,

And breathing soft, unwilling to wake to the new day

Yet sub-delighted.

 

Ah Mediterranean morning, when our world began!

Far-off Mediterranean mornings,

Pelasgic faces uncovered

And unbudding cyclamens.

 

The hare suddenly goes uphill

Laying back her long ears with unwinking bliss.

 

And up the pallid, sea-blenched Mediterranean stone-slopes

Rose cyclamen, ecstatic fore-runner!

Cyclamens, ruddy-muzzled cyclamens

In little bunches like bunches of wild hares

Muzzles together, ears-aprick

 

Whispering witchcraft

Like women at a well, the dawn-fountain.

 

Greece, and the world’s morning

While all the Parthenon marbles still fostered the roots of the cyclamen.

Violets

Pagan, rosy-muzzled violets

Autumnal

Dawn-pink,

Dawn-pale

Among squat toad-leaves sprinkling the unborn

Erechtheion marbles.

 

                                                                                                     Taormina

 

"
"

A snake came to my water-trough

On a hot, hot day, and I in pyjamas for the heat,

To drink there.

 

In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great dark carob tree

I came down the steps with my pitcher

And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at the trough

            before me.

 

He reached down from a fissure in the earth-wall in the gloom

And trailed his yellow-brown slackness soft-bellied down, over

            the edge of the stone trough

And rested his throat upon the stone bottom,

And where the water had dripped from the tap, in a small clearness,

He sipped with his straight mouth,

Softly drank through his straight gums, into his slack long body,

Silently.

 

Someone was before me at my water-trough,

And I, like a second-comer, waiting.

 

He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do,

And looked at me vaguely, as drinking cattle do,

And flickered his two-forked tongue from his lips, and mused

             a moment,

And stooped and drank a little more,

Being earth-brown, earth-golden from the burning bowels

            of the earth

On the day of Sicilian July, with Etna smoking.

 

The voice of my education said to me

He must be killed,

For in Sicily the black, black snakes are innocent, the gold

            are venomous.

 

And voices in me said, If you were a man

You would take a stick and break him now, and finish him off.

 

But must I confess how I liked him,

How glad I was he had come like a guest in quiet, to drink

            at my water-trough

And depart peaceful, pacified, and thankless,

Into the burning bowels of this earth?

 

Was it cowardice, that I dared not kill him?

Was it perversity, that I longed to talk to him?

Was it humility, to feel so honoured?

I felt so honoured.

 

And yet those voices:If you were not afraid, you would kill him!

 

And truly I was afraid, I was most afraid,

But even so, honoured still more

That he should seek my hospitality

From out the dark door of the secret earth.

 

He drank enough

And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken,

And flickered his tongue like a forked night on the air, so black,

Seeming to lick his lips,

And looked around like a god, unseeing, into the air,

And slowly turned his head,

And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice adream,

Proceeded to draw his slow length curving round

And climb again the broken bank of my wall-face.

 

And as he put his head into that dreadful hole,

And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders,

            and entered farther,

A sort of horror, a sort of protest against his withdrawing into

            that horrid black hole,

Deliberately going into the blackness, and slowly drawing

            himself after,

Overcame me now his back was turned.

 

I looked round, I put down my pitcher,

I picked up a clumsy log

And threw it at the water-trough with a clatter.

 

I think it did not hit him,

But suddenly that part of him that was left behind convulsed

            in an undignified haste,

Writhed like lightning, and was gone

Into the black hole, the earth-lipped fissure in the wall-front,

At which, in the intense still noon, I stared with fascination.

 

And immediately I regretted it.

I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act!

I despised myself and the voices of my accursed human education.

 

And I thought of the albatross,

And I wished he would come back, my snake.

 

For he seemed to me again like a king,

Like a king in exile, uncrowned in the underworld,

Now due to be crowned again.

 

And so, I missed my chance with one of the lords

Of life.

And I have something to expiate:

A pettiness.

 

                                                                                                     Taormina

 

 

"
"

Cyclones

of ecstatic dust

and ashes whirl

crusaders

from hallucinatory citadels

of shattered glass

into evacuate craters

 

A flock of dreams

browse on Necropolis

 

From the shores

of oval oceans

in the oxidized Orient

 

Onyx-eyed Odalisques

and ornithologists

observe the flight

of Eros obsolete

 

And ""Immortality""

mildews

in the museums of the moon

"
"

The Normal Monster

sings in the Green Sahara

 

The voice and offal

of the image of God

 

make Celtic noises

in these lyrical hells

 

Hurricanes

of reasoned musics

reap the uncensored earth

 

The loquent consciousness

of living things

pours in torrential languages

 

The elderly colloquists

the Spirit and the Flesh

are out of tongue

 

The Spirit

is impaled upon the phallus

 

Phoenix

of Irish fires

lighten the Occident

 

with Ireland's wings

flap pandemoniums

of Olympian prose

 

and satinize

the imperial Rose

of Gaelic perfumes —

England

the sadistic mother

embraces Erin

 

Master

of meteoric idiom

present

 

The word made flesh

and feeding upon itself

with erudite fangs

The sanguine

introspection of the womb

 

Don Juan

of Judea

upon a pilgrimage

to the Libido

 

The press

purring

its lullabies to sanity

 

Christ capitalized

scourging

incontrite usurers of destiny

in hole and corner temples

 

And hang

The soul's advertisements

outside the ecclesiast's Zoo

 

A gravid day

spawns

gutteral gargoyles

upon the Tower of Babel

 

Empyrean emporium

where the

rejector-recreator

Joyce

flashes the giant reflector

on the sub rosa

 

"
"

Little tapers leaning lighted diagonally

Stuck in coffin tables of the Café du Néant

Leaning to the breath of baited bodies

Like young poplars fringing the Loire

 

Eyes that are full of love

And eyes that are full of kohl

Projecting light across the fulsome ambiente

Trailing the rest of the animal behind them

Telling of tales without words

And lies of no consequence

One way or another

 

The young lovers hermetically buttoned up in black

To black cravat

To the blue powder edge dusting the yellow throat

What color could have been your bodies

When last you put them away

 

Nostalgic youth

Holding your mistress's pricked finger

In the indifferent flame of the taper

Synthetic symbol of LIFE

In this factitious chamber of DEATH

The woman

As usual

Is smiling as bravely

As it is given to her to be brave

 

While the brandy cherries

In winking glasses

Are decomposing

Harmoniously

With the flesh of spectators

And at a given spot

There is one

Who

Having the concentric lighting focussed precisely upon her

Prophetically blossoms in perfect putrefaction

Yet there are cabs outside the door.

 

"
"

Man of absolute physical equilibrium

You stand so straight on your legs

Every plank or clod you plant your feet on

Becomes roots for those limbs

 

Among the men you accrete to yourself

You are more heavy

And more light

Force being most equitably disposed

Is easiest to lift from the ground

So at the same time

Your movements

Unassailable

Savor of the airy-fairy of the ballet

The essence of a Mademoiselle Genée

Winks in the to-and-fro of your cuff-links

 

Your projectile nose

Has meddled in the more serious business

Of the battle-field

With the same incautious aloofness

Of intense occupation

That it snuffles the trail of the female

And the comfortable

Passing odors of love

 

Your genius

So much less in your brain

 

Than in your body

Reinforcing the hitherto negligible

 

Qualities

Of life

Deals so exclusively with

The vital

That it is equally happy expressing itself

Through the activity of pushing

THINGS

In the opposite direction

To that which they are lethargically willing to go

As in the amative language

Of the eyes

 

Fundamentally unreliable

You leave others their initial strength

Concentrating

On stretching the theoretic elastic of your conceptions

Till the extent is adequate

To the hooking on

Of any — or all

Forms of creative idiosyncrasy

While the occasional snap

Of actual production

Stings the face of the public.

 

"
"

I

 

Spawn of fantasies

Sifting the appraisable

Pig Cupid his rosy snout

Rooting erotic garbage

""Once upon a time""

Pulls a weed white star-topped

Among wild oats sown in mucous membrane

I would an eye in a Bengal light

Eternity in a sky-rocket

Constellations in an ocean

Whose rivers run no fresher

Than a trickle of saliva

 

These are suspect places

 

I must live in my lantern

Trimming subliminal flicker

Virginal to the bellows

Of experience

Colored glass.

 

 

 

II

 

At your mercy

Our Universe

Is only

A colorless onion

You derobe

Sheath by sheath

Remaining

A disheartening odour

About your nervy hands

 

 

 

III

 

Night

Heavy with shut-flower's nightmares

---------------------------------------------

Noon

Curled to the solitaire

Core of the

Sun

 

 

 

IV

 

Evolution fall foul of

Sexual equality

Prettily miscalculate

Similitude

 

Unnatural selection

Breed such sons and daughters

As shall jibber at each other

Uninterpretable cryptonyms

Under the moon

 

Give them some way of braying brassily

For caressive calling

Or to homophonous hiccoughs

Transpose the laugh

Let them suppose that tears

Are snowdrops or molasses

Or anything

Than human insufficiences

Begging dorsal vertebrae

 

Let meeting be the turning

To the antipodean

And Form a blur

Anything

Than to seduce them

To the one

As simple satisfaction

For the other

 

 

 

V

 

Shuttle-cock and battle-door

A little pink-love

And feathers are strewn

 

 

 

VI

 

Let Joy go solace-winged

To flutter whom she may concern

 

 

 

VII

 

Once in a mezzanino

The starry ceiling

Vaulted an unimaginable family

Bird-like abortions

With human throats

And Wisdom's eyes

Who wore lamp-shade red dresses

And woolen hair

 

One bore a baby

In a padded porte-enfant

Tied with a sarsenet ribbon

To her goose's wings

 

But for the abominable shadows

I would have lived

Among their fearful furniture

To teach them to tell me their secrets

Before I guessed

-- Sweeping the brood clean out

 

 

 

VIII

 

Midnight empties the street

--- --- --- To the left a boy

--- One wing has been washed in rain

The other will never be clean any more ---

Pulling door-bells to remind

Those that are snug

To the right a haloed ascetic

Threading houses

Probes wounds for souls

--- The poor can't wash in hot water ---

And I don't know which turning to take ---

 

 

 

IX

 

We might have coupled

In the bed-ridden monopoly of a moment

Or broken flesh with one another

At the profane communion table

Where wine is spill't on promiscuous lips

 

We might have given birth to a butterfly

With the daily-news

Printed in blood on its wings

 

 

 

X

 

In some

Prenatal plagiarism

Foetal buffoons

Caught tricks

--- --- --- --- ---

From archetypal pantomime

Stringing emotions

Looped aloft

--- --- --- ---

For the blind eyes

That Nature knows us with

And most of Nature is green

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

 

 

 

XI

 

Green things grow

Salads

For the cerebral

Forager's revival

And flowered flummery

Upon bossed bellies

Of mountains

Rolling in the sun

 

 

 

XII

 

Shedding our petty pruderies

From slit eyes

 

We sidle up

To Nature

--- --- --- that irate pornographist

 

 

 

XIII

 

The wind stuffs the scum of the white street

Into my lungs and my nostrils

Exhilarated birds

Prolonging flight into the night

Never reaching --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---

"
"

My body is opaque to the soul.

Driven of the spirit, long have I sought to temper it unto the spirit’s

    longing,

But my mind, too, is opaque to the soul.

O Spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger,

Direct it to the lid of its flesh-eye.

I am weak with much giving.

I am weak the desire to give more.

(How strong a thing is the little finger!)

So weak that I have confused the body with the soul,

And the body with its little finger.

(How frail is the little finger.)

My voice could not carry to you did you dwell in stars,

O spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger . .

"
"

Hair–braided chestnut,

coiled like a lyncher’s rope,

Eye–fagots,

Lips–old scars, or the first red blisters,

Breath–the last sweet scent of cane,

And her slim body, white as the ash

         of black flesh after flame.

 

"
"

Within this black hive to-night

There swarm a million bees;

Bees passing in and out the moon,

Bees escaping out the moon,

Bees returning through the moon,

Silver bees intently buzzing,

Silver honey dripping from the swarm of bees

Earth is a waxen cell of the world comb,

And I, a drone,

Lying on my back,

Lipping honey,

Getting drunk with that silver honey,

Wish that I might fly out past the moon

And curl forever in some far-off farmyard flower.

 

"
"

Tell me, dear beauty of the dusk,

   When purple ribbons bind the hill,

    Do dreams your secret wish fulfill,

Do prayers, like kernels from the husk

 

Come from your lips? Tell me if when

    The mountains loom at night, giant shades

    Of softer shadow, swift like blades

Of grass seeds come to flower. Then

 

Tell me if the night winds bend

    Them towards me, if the Shenandoah

    As it ripples past your shore,

Catches the soul of what you send.

 

 

 

"
"

into the strenuous briefness

Life:

handorgans and April

darkness,friends

 

i charge laughing.

Into the hair-thin tints

of yellow dawn,

into the women-coloured twilight

 

i smilingly

glide.  I

into the big vermilion departure

swim,sayingly;

 

(Do you think?)the

i do,world

is probably made

of roses & hello:

 

(of solongs and,ashes)

 

"
"

All in green went my love riding

on a great horse of gold

into the silver dawn.

 

four lean hounds crouched low and smiling

the merry deer ran before.

 

Fleeter be they than dappled dreams

the swift sweet deer

the red rare deer.

 

Four red roebuck at a white water

the cruel bugle sang before.

 

Horn at hip went my love riding

riding the echo down

into the silver dawn.

 

four lean hounds crouched low and smiling

the level meadows ran before.

 

Softer be they than slippered sleep

the lean lithe deer

the fleet flown deer.

 

Four fleet does at a gold valley

the famished arrow sang before.

 

Bow at belt went my love riding

riding the mountain down

into the silver dawn.

 

four lean hounds crouched low and smiling

the sheer peaks ran before.

 

Paler be they than daunting death

the sleek slim deer

the tall tense deer.

 

Four tall stags at a green mountain

the lucky hunter sang before.

 

All in green went my love riding

on a great horse of gold

into the silver dawn.

 

four lean hounds crouched low and smiling

my heart fell dead before.

 

"
"

the bigness of cannon

is skilful,

 

but i have seen

death’s clever enormous voice

which hides in a fragility

of poppies. . . .

 

i say that sometimes

on these long talkative animals

are laid fists of huger silence.

 

I have seen all the silence

filled with vivid noiseless boys

 

at Roupy

i have seen

between barrages,

 

the night utter ripe unspeaking girls.

 

"
"

O sweet spontaneous

earth how often have

the

doting

 

             fingers of

prurient philosophers pinched

and

poked

 

thee

,has the naughty thumb

of science prodded

thy

 

        beauty      how

often have religions taken

thee upon their scraggy knees

squeezing and

 

buffeting thee that thou mightest conceive

gods

         (but

true

 

to the incomparable

couch of death thy

rhythmic

lover

 

             thou answerest

 

 

them only with

 

                              spring)

 

"
"

Every morning, my grandmother cleaned the Fischer stove

in the back of the trailer, lifted ash in a shovel, careful

 

not to spill the white-gray dust. Precious, she said, her breath

smoking in the cold. Precious in winter's first lavender

 

not-quite-light—and you could smell it, the faintest acrid hint

of ash, a crispness calling you from bed. You could watch her

 

cap it in a chicory coffee can to stack among others, back bent

from a long-gone fever. For the garden in spring, she said.

"
"

When you, that at this moment are to me

Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,

And be no more the warder of my heart,

Whereof again myself shall hold the key;

And be no more—what now you seem to be—

The sun, from which all excellences start

In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart

Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;

I shall remember only of this hour—

And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—

The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,

Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,

Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,

The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.

 

"
"

Pity me not because the light of day

At close of day no longer walks the sky;

Pity me not for beauties passed away

From field and thicket as the year goes by;

Pity me not the waning of the moon,

Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea,

Nor that a man’s desire is hushed so soon,

And you no longer look with love on me.

This have I known always: Love is no more

Than the wide blossom which the wind assails,

Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore,

Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales:

Pity me that the heart is slow to learn

What the swift mind beholds at every turn.

"
"

Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!

Give back my book and take my kiss instead.

Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,

“What a big book for such a little head!”

Come, I will show you now my newest hat,

And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!

Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.

I never again shall tell you what I think.

I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;

You will not catch me reading any more:

I shall be called a wife to pattern by;

And some day when you knock and push the door,

Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,

I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.

 

"
"

I shall go back again to the bleak shore

And build a little shanty on the sand,

In such a way that the extremest band

Of brittle seaweed will escape my door

But by a yard or two; and nevermore

Shall I return to take you by the hand;

I shall be gone to what I understand,

And happier than I ever was before.

The love that stood a moment in your eyes,

The words that lay a moment on your tongue,

Are one with all that in a moment dies,

A little under-said and over-sung.

But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies

Unchanged from what they were when I was young.

"
"

Loving you less than life, a little less

Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall

Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess

I cannot swear I love you not at all.

For there is that about you in this light—

A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—

Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight

To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.

And I am made aware of many a week

I shall consume, remembering in what way

Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek

And what divine absurdities you say:

Till all the world, and I, and surely you,

Will know I love you, whether or not I do.

 

"
"

I, being born a woman and distressed

By all the needs and notions of my kind,

Am urged by your propinquity to find

Your person fair, and feel a certain zest

To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:

So subtly is the fume of life designed,

To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,

And leave me once again undone, possessed.

Think not for this, however, the poor treason

Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,

I shall remember you with love, or season

My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:

I find this frenzy insufficient reason

For conversation when we meet again.

"
"

Still will I harvest beauty where it grows:

In coloured fungus and the spotted fog

Surprised on foods forgotten; in ditch and bog

Filmed brilliant with irregular rainbows

Of rust and oil, where half a city throws

Its empty tins; and in some spongy log

Whence headlong leaps the oozy emerald frog. . . .

And a black pupil in the green scum shows.

Her the inhabiter of divers places

Surmising at all doors, I push them all.

Oh, you that fearful of a creaking hinge

Turn back forevermore with craven faces,

I tell you Beauty bears an ultra fringe

Unguessed of you upon her gossamer shawl!

 

"
"

Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.

Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,

And lay them prone upon the earth and cease

To ponder on themselves, the while they stare

At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere

In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese

Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release

From dusty bondage into luminous air.

O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,

When first the shaft into his vision shone

Of light anatomized! Euclid alone

Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they

Who, though once only and then but far away,

Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.

"
"

The white bark writhed and sputtered like a fish

Upon the coals, exuding odorous smoke

She knelt and blew, in a surging desolate wish

For comfort; and the sleeping ashes woke

And scattered to the hearth, but no thin fire

Broke suddenly, the wood was wet with rain.

Then, softly stepping forth from her desire,

(Being mindful of like passion hurled in vain

Upon a similar task, in other days)

She thrust her breath against the stubborn coal,

Bringing to bear upon its hilt the whole

Of her still body. . . there sprang a little blaze. . .

A pack of hounds, the flame swept up the flue!—

And the blue night stood flattened against the window,

     staring through.

 

"
"

She had forgotten how the August night

Was level as a lake beneath the moon,

In which she swam a little, losing sight

Of shore; and how the boy, who was at noon

Simple enough, not different from the rest,

Wore now a pleasant mystery as he went,

Which seemed to her an honest enough test

Whether she loved him, and she was content.

So loud, so loud the million crickets’ choir. . .

So sweet the night, so long-drawn-out and late. . .

And if the man were not her spirit’s mate,

Why was her body sluggish with desire?

Stark on the open field the moonlight fell,

But the oak tree’s shadow was deep and black and

     secret as a well.

 

"
"

Then said a teacher, Speak to us of Teach-

ing.

    And he said:

    No man can reveal to you aught but that

which already lies half asleep in the dawn-

ing of your knowledge.

    The teacher who walks in the shadow of

the temple, among his followers, gives not

of his wisdom but rather of his faith and

his lovingness.

    If he is indeed wise he does not bid you

enter the house of his wisdom, but rather

leads you to the threshold of your own

mind.

   The astronomer may speak to you of his

understanding of space, but he cannot give

you his understanding.

   The musician may sing to you of the

rhythm which is in all space, but he cannot

give you the ear which arrests the rhythm

nor the voice that echoes it.

   And he who is versed in the science of

numbers can tell of the regions of weight

and measure, but he cannot conduct you

thither.

   For the vision of one man lends not its

wings to another man.

   And even as each one of you stands alone

in God’s knowledge, so must each one of

you be alone in his knowledge of God and

in his understanding of the earth.

 

"
"

Then a hermit, who visited the city once

a year, came forth and said, Speak to us of

Pleasure.

    And he answered, saying:

    Pleasure is a freedom-song,

    But it is not freedom.

    It is the blossoming of your desires,

    But it is not their fruit.

    It is a depth calling unto a height,

    But it is not the deep nor the high.

    It is the caged taking wing,

    But it is not space encompassed.

    Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-

song.

    And I fain would have you sing it with

fullness of heart; yet I would not have you

lose your hearts in the singing.

 

    Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it

were all, and they are judged and rebuked.

    I would not judge nor rebuke them. I

would have them seek.

    For they shall find pleasure, but not her

alone;

    Seven are her sisters, and the least of them

is more beautiful than pleasure.

    Have you not heard of the man who was

digging in the earth for roots and found a

treasure?

 

    And some of your elders remember

pleasures with regret like wrongs com-

mitted in drunkenness.

    But regret is the beclouding of the mind

 and not its chastisement.

    They should remember their pleasures with

gratitude, as they would the harvest of a

summer.

    Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them

be comforted.

 

    And there are among you those who are

neither young to seek nor old to remember;

    And in their fear of seeking and remem-

bering they shun all pleasures, lest they

neglect the spirit or offend against it.

    But even in their foregoing is their

pleasure.

    And thus they too find a treasure though

they dig for roots with quivering hands.

    But tell me, who is he that can offend the

spirit?

    Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of

the night, or the firefly the stars?

    And shall your flame or your smoke

burden the wind?

    Think you the spirit is a still pool which

you can trouble with a staff?

 

    Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure

you do but store the desire in the recesses

of your being.

    Who knows but that which seems omitted

today, waits for tomorrow?

    Even your body knows its heritage and

its rightful need and will not be deceived.

    And your body is the harp of your soul,

    And it is yours to bring forth sweet

music from it or confused sounds.

 

     And now you ask in your heart, “How

shall we distinguish that which is good in

pleasure from that which is not good?”

     Go to your fields and your gardens, and

you shall learn that it is the pleasure of

the bee to gather honey of the flower,

     But it is also the pleasure of the flower

to yield its honey to the bee.

     For to the bee a flower is a fountain of

life,

     And to the flower a bee is a messenger of

love,

     And to both, bee and flower, the giving

and the receiving of pleasure is a need and

an ecstasy.

 

     People of Orphalese, be in your pleas-

ures like the flowers and the bees.

 

"
"

And a poet said, Speak to us of Beauty.

     And he answered:

     Where shall you seek beauty, and how

shall you find her unless she herself be your

way and your guide?

     And how shall you speak of her except

she be the weaver of your speech?

 

     The aggrieved and the injured say,

“Beauty is kind and gentle.

     Like a young mother half-shy of her

own glory she walks among us.”

     And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is

a thing of might and dread.

     Like the tempest she shakes the earth

beneath us and the sky above us.”

 

     The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is

of soft whisperings. She speaks in our spirit.

     Her voice yields to our silences like a faint

light that quivers in fear of the shadow.”

     But the restless say, “We have heard her

shouting among the mountains,

     And with her cries came the sound of

hoofs, and the beating of wings and

the roaring of lions.”

 

     At night the watchmen of the city say,

“Beauty shall rise with the dawn from the

east.”

     And at noontide the toilers and the way-

farers say, “We have seen her leaning over

the earth from the windows of the sunset.”

 

     In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall

come with the spring leaping upon the hills.”

     And in the summer heat the reapers say,

“We have seen her dancing with the autumn

leaves, and we saw a drift of snow in her

hair.”

     All these things have you said of beauty,

     Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of

needs unsatisfied,

     And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy.

     It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty

hand stretched forth,

     But rather a heart enflamed and a soul en-

chanted.

     It is not the image you would see nor the

song you would hear,

     But rather an image you see though you

close your eyes and a song you hear though

you shut your ears.

     It is not the sap within the furrowed bark,

nor a wing attached to a claw,

     But rather a garden for ever in bloom and

a flock of angels for ever in flight.

 

     People of Orphalese, beauty is life when

life unveils her holy face.

     But you are life and you are the veil.

     Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mir-

ror.

     But you are eternity and you are the mir-

ror.

 

"
"

Then a lawyer said, But what of our Laws,

master?

    And he answered:

    You delight in laying down laws,

    Yet you delight more in breaking them.

    Like children playing by the ocean who

build sand-towers with constancy and then

destroy them with laughter.

    But while you build your sand-towers the

ocean brings more sand to the shore,

    And when you destroy them the ocean

laughs with you.

    Verily the ocean laughs always with the

innocent.

 

    But what of those to whom life is not an

ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-

towers,

    But to whom life is a rock, and the law

a chisel with which they would carve it in

their own likeness?

    What of the cripple who hates dancers?

    What of the ox who loves his yoke and

deems the elk and deer of the forest

stray and vagrant things?

    What of the old serpent who cannot

shed his skin, and calls all others naked

and shameless?

    And of him who comes early to the

wedding-feast, and when over-fed and tired

goes his way saying that all feasts are

violation and all feasters lawbreakers?

 

    What shall I say of these save that they

too stand in the sunlight, but with their

backs to the sun?

    They see only their shadows, and their

shadows are their laws.

    And what is the sun to them but a caster

of shadows?

    And what is it to acknowledge the laws

but to stoop down and trace their shadows

upon the earth?

    But you who walk facing the sun, what

images drawn on the earth can hold you?

    You who travel with the wind, what

weather-vane shall direct your course?

    What man’s law shall bind you if you

break your yoke but upon no man's prison

door?

    What laws shall you fear if you dance

but stumble against no man’s iron chains?

    And who is he that shall bring you to

judgment if you tear off your garment yet

leave it in no man’s path?

 

    People of Orphalese, you can muffle the

drum, and you can loosen the strings of the

lyre, but who shall command the skylark

not to sing?

"
"

And an orator said, Speak to us of Free-

dom.

    And he answered:

    At the city gate and by your fireside I

have seen you prostrate yourself and worship

your own freedom,

    Even as slaves humble themselves before

a tyrant and praise him though he slays

them.

    Ay, in the grove of the temple and in

the shadow of the citadel I have seen the

freest among you wear their freedom as a

yoke and a handcuff.

    And my heart bled within me; for you

can only be free when even the desire of

seeking freedom becomes a harness to you,

and when you cease to speak of freedom

as a goal and a fulfilment.

 

    You shall be free indeed when your days

are not without a care nor your nights with-

out a want and a grief,

    But rather when these things girdle your

life and yet you rise above them naked and

unbound.

 

    And how shall you rise beyond your

days and nights unless you break the chains

which you at the dawn of your under-

standing have fastened around your noon

hour?

    In truth that which you call freedom is

the strongest of these chains, though its

links glitter in the sun and dazzle your eyes.

 

    And what is it but fragments of your own

self you would discard that you may become

free?

    If it is an unjust law you would abolish,

that law was written with your own hand

upon your own forehead.

    You cannot erase it by burning your law

 books nor by washing the foreheads of your

judges, though you pour the sea upon them.

    And if it is a despot you would dethrone,

see first that his throne erected within you is

destroyed.

    For how can a tyrant rule the free and

the proud, but for a tyranny in their own

freedom and a shame in their own pride?

    And if it is a care you would cast off, that

care has been chosen by you rather than

imposed upon you.

    And if it is a fear you would dispel, the

seat of that fear is in your heart and not in

the hand of the feared.

 

    Verily all things move within your being

in constant half embrace, the desired and

the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished,

the pursued and that which you would

escape.

    These things move within you as lights

and shadows in pairs that cling.

    And when the shadow fades and is no

more, the light that lingers becomes a

shadow to another light.

    And thus your freedom when it loses its

fetters becomes itself the fetter of a greater

freedom.

 

"
"

And the weaver said, Speak to us of

Clothes.

     And he answered:

     Your clothes conceal much of your beauty,

yet they hide not the unbeautiful.

     And though you seek in garments the

freedom of privacy you may find in them

a harness and a chain.

     Would that you could meet the sun

and the wind with more of your skin and less

of your raiment,

     For the breath of life is in the sunlight

and the hand of life is in the wind.

 

     Some of you say, “It is the north wind

who has woven the clothes we wear.”

     And I say, Ay, it was the north wind,

     But shame was his loom, and the soften-

ing of the sinews was his thread.

     And when his work was done he laughed

in the forest.

     Forget not that modesty is for a shield

against the eye of the unclean.

     And when the unclean shall be no more,

what were modesty but a fetter and a fouling

of the mind?

     And forget not that the earth delights to

feel your bare feet and the winds long to

play with your hair.

"
"

And a merchant said, Speak to us of

Buying and Selling.

     And he answered and said:

     To you the earth yields her fruit, and you

shall not want if you but know how to fill

your hands.

     It is in exchanging the gifts of the earth

that you shall find abundance and be satisfied.

     Yet unless the exchange be in love and

kindly justice, it will but lead some to greed

and others to hunger.

 

     When in the market place you toilers of

the sea and fields and vineyards meet the

weavers and the potters and the gatherers of

spices,—

     Invoke then the master spirit of the earth,

to come into your midst and sanctify the

scales and the reckoning that weighs value

against value.

 

     And suffer not the barren-handed to take

part in your transactions, who would sell

their words for your labour.

     To such men you should say,

      “Come with us to the field, or go with

our brothers to the sea and cast your net;

     For the land and the sea shall be bountiful

to you even as to us.”

 

     And if there come the singers and the

dancers and the flute players,—buy of their

gifts also.

     For they too are gatherers of fruit and

frankincense, and that which they bring,

though fashioned of dreams, is raiment

 and food for your soul.

 

     And before you leave the market place,

see that no one has gone his way with

empty hands.

     For the master spirit of the earth shall

not sleep peacefully upon the wind till the

needs of the least of you are satisfied.

"
"

Then Almitra spoke again and said, And

what of Marriage, master?

     And he answered saying:

     You were born together, and together you

shall be forevermore.

     You shall be together when the white

wings of death scatter your days.

     Ay, you shall be together even in the

silent memory of God.

     But let there be spaces in your togetherness,

     And let the winds of the heavens dance

between you.

 

     Love one another, but make not a bond

of love:

     Let it rather be a moving sea between

the shores of your souls.

     Fill each other’s cup but drink not from

one cup.

     Give one another of your bread but eat

not from the same loaf.

     Sing and dance together and be joyous,

but let each one of you be alone,

     Even as the strings of a lute are alone

though they quiver with the same music.

 

     Give your hearts, but not into each

other’s keeping.

     For only the hand of Life can contain

your hearts.

     And stand together yet not too near

together:

     For the pillars of the temple stand apart,

     And the oak tree and the cypress grow

not in each other’s shadow.

"
"

Then said Almitra, Speak to us of Love.

     And he raised his head and looked upon

the people, and there fell a stillness upon

them. And with a great voice he said:

     When love beckons to you, follow him,

     Though his ways are hard and steep.

     And when his wings enfold you yield to

him,

     Though the sword hidden among his

pinions may wound you.

     And when he speaks to you believe in

him,

     Though his voice may shatter your dreams

as the north wind lays waste the garden.

 

     For even as love crowns you so shall he

crucify you. Even as he is for your growth

so is he for your pruning.

     Even as he ascends to your height and

caresses your tenderest branches that quiver

in the sun,

     So shall he descend to your roots and

shake them in their clinging to the earth.

                                       •

     Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto

himself.

     He threshes you to make you naked.

     He sifts you to free you from your husks.

     He grinds you to whiteness.

     He kneads you until you are pliant;

     And then he assigns you to his sacred

fire, that you may become sacred bread for

God’s sacred feast.

 

     All these things shall love do unto you

that you may know the secrets of your

heart, and in that knowledge become a

fragment of Life’s heart.

 

     But if in your fear you would seek only

love’s peace and love’s pleasure,

     Then it is better for you that you cover

your nakedness and pass out of love’s

threshing-floor,

     Into the seasonless world where you

shall laugh, but not all of your laughter,

and weep, but not all of your tears.

                                      •

     Love gives naught but itself and takes

naught but from itself.

     Love possesses not nor would it be

possessed;

     For love is sufficient unto love.

 

     When you love you should not say,

“God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am

in the heart of God.”

     And think not you can direct the course

of love, for love, if it finds you worthy,

directs your course.

 

     Love has no other desire but to fulfil

itself.

     But if you love and must needs have

desires, let these be your desires:

     To melt and be like a running brook

that sings its melody to the night.

     To know the pain of too much tenderness.

     To be wounded by your own under-

standing of love;

     And to bleed willingly and joyfully.

     To wake at dawn with a winged heart

and give thanks for another day of loving;

     To rest at the noon hour and meditate

love’s ecstasy;

     To return home at eventide with grati-

tude;

     And then to sleep with a prayer for the

beloved in your heart and a song of praise

upon your lips.

"
"

There is big excitement in C block today.

On the window sill,

in a plastic ice cream cup

a little plant is growing.

This is all the men want to talk about:

how an apple seed germinated

in a crack of damp concrete;

how they tore open tea bags

to collect the leaves, leached them

in water, then laid the sprout onto the bed

made of Lipton. How this finger of spring

dug one delicate root down

into the dark fannings and now

two small sleeves of green

are pushing out from the emerging tip.

The men are tipsy with this miracle.

Each morning, one by one,

they go to the window and check

the progress of the struggling plant.

All through the day they return

to stand over the seedling

and whisper.

"
"

When we got close enough

we could hear

 

rivers inside the ice

heaving splits

 

the groaning of a ledge

about to

 

calve. Strewn in the moraine

fresh moose sign—

 

tawny oblong pellets

breaking up

 

sharp black shale. In one breath

ice and air—

 

history, the record

of breaking—

 

prophecy, the warning

of what's yet to break

 

out from under

four stories

 

of bone-crushing turquoise

retreating.

"
"

Holy the days of the prune face junkie men

Holy the scag pumped arms

Holy the Harlem faces

looking for space in the dead rock valleys of the City

 

Holy the flowers

sing holy for the raped holidays

and Bessie’s guts spilling on the Mississippi

road

 

Sing holy for all of the faces that inched

toward freedom, followed the North Star

like Harriet and Douglass

 

Sing holy for all our singers and sinners

for all the shapes and forms

of our liberation

 

Holy, holy, holy for the midnight hassles

for the gods of our Ancestors bellowing

sunsets and blues that gave us vision

 O God make us strong and ready 

 

Holy, holy, holy for the day we dig ourselves

and rise in the sun of our own peace and place

and space, yes Lord.

 

 

                                                                                                1969/70

 

"
"

The door to the past is a strange door. It swings open and things pass through it, but they pass in one direction only. No man can return across that threshold, though he can look down still and see the green light waver in the weeds.

          Loren Eiseley

A door opens in the wilderness.

People cross through it—bloused women families

 

Acquaintances friends all the ones I have loved

Sleep-walkers night-walkers each dazed and shorn—

 

Street aurous with ice, a snowfall scratched into

Moons—and everything I’d known—

 

Inside the bleak floating light of my lungs

In the capillaries of my eyes a blood

 

Glancing through the hatches—

If I said I would always be grateful

 

If I lied or touched with spite

If night is just a foamline of shadows

 

Though we were both lost—the door

Opening—the fear of being shown

 

Whole to the one who must love you still—

And stopped as if on a walk to say

 Look at that and what matters what really counts 

And I’ll tell you everything if you promise I promise

 

I stood at door and behind me heard

Snow-plows scrape against roads

 

At the center of night—unknown to yourself 

And the word I said out-loud to no one

 

That meant it was all to no purpose 

The word for the desire inside destruction 

 

For everything that can never be brought back—

Loose snow blown hard to each bank

 

And the common reel of those who

To avoid one extreme rush toward its opposite—

 

Snow blasted to piles—and never opened up to

Anything that could reach me until you reached me—

 

Which hours belonged to us

When was I unknowingly alone

 

Why did you always return to walk here a path

Behind my closed eyes shedding salt

 

Dry snowfall and sticks—still were you here

With me I might say The moon rose in the casement window 

 The red-haired boy across the street has learned to ride his bike

There are still picnics there are fountains

 

And the world I am leaving behind saysOne learns to see one learns to be kind—

 

I closed my eyes I closed my hands

I shut down the fields in my arms

 

The cattle on the plains veins ditches

Blue ravines a gray bird

 

Sailing through a poplar brake kids

Throwing snow I closed the last swinging juncos

 

Sheep wool caught on barbed wire I closed

Fumes and clear patches of sky I seized

 

The river the town I shut down

The hard muscles of sleep farmlands

 

Warming under midnight salt-lights scruff-pines

On the ridge animals scattering across slopes I closed

 

The smooth bone of evening a storm

On the hills white and noiseless spindled

 

Prairies where I was born I shut I seized

The clouds I closed in anger—fervor—ardor

 

"
"

I came an errand one cloud-blowing evening

To a slab-built, black-paper-covered house

Of one room and one window and one door,

The only dwelling in a waste cut over

A hundred square miles round it in the mountains:

And that not dwelt in now by men or women.

(It never had been dwelt in, though, by women,

So what is this I make a sorrow of?)

I came as census-taker to the waste

To count the people in it and found none,

None in the hundred miles, none in the house,

Where I came last with some hope, but not much,

After hours’ overlooking from the cliffs

An emptiness flayed to the very stone.

I found no people that dared show themselves,

None not in hiding from the outward eye.

The time was autumn, but how anyone

Could tell the time of year when every tree

That could have dropped a leaf was down itself

And nothing but the stump of it was left

Now bringing out its rings in sugar of pitch;

And every tree up stood a rotting trunk

Without a single leaf to spend on autumn,

Or branch to whistle after what was spent.

Perhaps the wind the more without the help

Of breathing trees said something of the time

Of year or day the way it swung a door

Forever off the latch, as if rude men

Passed in and slammed it shut each one behind him

For the next one to open for himself.

I counted nine I had no right to count

(But this was dreamy unofficial counting)

Before I made the tenth across the threshold.

Where was my supper? Where was anyone’s?

No lamp was lit. Nothing was on the table.

The stove was cold—the stove was off the chimney—

And down by one side where it lacked a leg.

The people that had loudly passed the door

Were people to the ear but not the eye.

They were not on the table with their elbows.

They were not sleeping in the shelves of bunks.

I saw no men there and no bones of men there.

I armed myself against such bones as might be

With the pitch-blackened stub of an ax-handle

I picked up off the straw-dust covered floor.

Not bones, but the ill-fitted window rattled.

The door was still because I held it shut

While I thought what to do that could be done—

About the house—about the people not there.

This house in one year fallen to decay

Filled me with no less sorrow than the houses

Fallen to ruin in ten thousand years

Where Asia wedges Africa from Europe.

Nothing was left to do that I could see

Unless to find that there was no one there

And declare to the cliffs too far for echo,

“The place is desert, and let whoso lurks

In silence, if in this he is aggrieved,

Break silence now or be forever silent.

Let him say why it should not be declared so.”

The melancholy of having to count souls

Where they grow fewer and fewer every year

Is extreme where they shrink to none at all.

It must be I want life to go on living. 

"
"

Why make so much of fragmentary blue

In here and there a bird, or butterfly,

Or flower, or wearing-stone, or open eye,

When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue?

 

Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet)—

Though some savants make earth include the sky;

And blue so far above us comes so high,

It only gives our wish for blue a whet.

 

"
"

The living come with grassy tread

To read the gravestones on the hill;

The graveyard draws the living still,

But never any more the dead.

 

The verses in it say and say:

‘The ones who living come today

To read the stones and go away

Tomorrow dead will come to stay.’

 

So sure of death the marbles rhyme,

Yet can’t help marking all the time

How no one dead will seem to come.

What is it men are shrinking from?

 

It would be easy to be clever

And tell the stones: Men hate to die

And have stopped dying now forever.

I think they would believe the lie.

 

"
"

Nature’s first green is gold,

Her hardest hue to hold.

Her early leaf’s a flower;

But only so an hour.

Then leaf subsides to leaf.

So Eden sank to grief,

So dawn goes down to day.

Nothing gold can stay.

 

"
"

Once when the snow of the year was beginning to fall,

We stopped by a mountain pasture to say, ‘Whose colt?’

A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall,

The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head

And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.

We heard the miniature thunder where he fled,

And we saw him, or thought we saw him, dim and grey,

Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.

‘I think the little fellow’s afraid of the snow.

He isn’t winter-broken. It isn’t play

With the little fellow at all. He’s running away.

I doubt if even his mother could tell him, “Sakes,

It’s only weather.” He’d think she didn’t know!

Where is his mother? He can’t be out alone.’

And now he comes again with a clatter of stone

And mounts the wall again with whited eyes

And all his tail that isn't hair up straight.

He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.

‘Whoever it is that leaves him out so late,

When other creatures have gone to stall and bin,

Ought to be told to come and take him in.’

"
"

Before man came to blow it right

     The wind once blew itself untaught,

And did its loudest day and night

     In any rough place where it caught.

 

Man came to tell it what was wrong:

     It hadn’t found the place to blow;

It blew too hard—the aim was song.

     And listen—how it ought to go!

 

He took a little in his mouth,

     And held it long enough for north

To be converted into south,

     And then by measure blew it forth.

 

By measure. It was word and note,

     The wind the wind had meant to be—

A little through the lips and throat.

     The aim was song—the wind could see.

 

"
"

They sent him back to her. The letter came

Saying . . . And she could have him. And before

She could be sure there was no hidden ill

Under the formal writing, he was there,

Living. They gave him back to her alive—

How else? They are not known to send the dead—

And not disfigured visibly. His face?

His hands? She had to look, and ask,

‘What was it, dear?’ And she had given all

And still she had all—they had—they the lucky!

Wasn’t she glad now? Everything seemed won,

And all the rest for them permissible ease.

She had to ask, ‘What was it, dear?’

 

                                                                 ‘Enough

Yet not enough. A bullet through and through,

High in the breast. Nothing but what good care

And medicine and rest, and you a week,

Can cure me of to go again.’ The same

Grim giving to do over for them both.

She dared no more than ask him with her eyes

How was it with him for a second trial.

And with his eyes he asked her not to ask.

They had given him back to her, but not to keep.

 

"
"

Spades take up leaves

No better than spoons,

And bags full of leaves

Are light as balloons.

 

I make a great noise

Of rustling all day

Like rabbit and deer

Running away.

 

But the mountains I raise

Elude my embrace,

Flowing over my arms

And into my face.

 

I may load and unload

Again and again

Till I fill the whole shed,

And what have I then?

 

Next to nothing for weight,

And since they grew duller

From contact with earth,

Next to nothing for color.

 

Next to nothing for use,

But a crop is a crop,

And who’s to say where

The harvest shall stop?

 

"
"

The house had gone to bring again

To the midnight sky a sunset glow.

Now the chimney was all of the house that stood,

Like a pistil after the petals go.

 

The barn opposed across the way,

That would have joined the house in flame

Had it been the will of the wind, was left

To bear forsaken the place’s name.

 

No more it opened with all one end

For teams that came by the stony road

To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs

And brush the mow with the summer load.

 

The birds that came to it through the air

At broken windows flew out and in,

Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh

From too much dwelling on what has been.

 

Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf,

And the aged elm, though touched with fire;

And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm;

And the fence post carried a strand of wire.

For them there was really nothing sad.

But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept,

One had to be versed in country things

Not to believe the phoebes wept.

"
"

We did not want to be

unblessed, so we were blessed.

 

Long, thin wire, a little

patch where we might lay our

 

heads. It was this way, this

looking fore and back, a pole

 

held tightly in our

hands. You want to tell me

 

what went wrong? Confusing

shapes across a wall, depression

 

in the ground. The gorgeous

soldiers fought and fell. Hie 

 unto hell. How we will lie in

that brave grave apart,

 

our aperture: a heart

that has been ruptured

 

absolutely by a passing God.

 

"
"







what is at first a bodily impression turns out to be a condition of knowing

—Judith Butler







    in the airport terminal I sit down in a row of chairs without looking at the man in the chair beside me… my chair is adjacent to a narrow formica table where I set the coffee and muffin I’ve bought… I’m tempted to look at the man sitting on the other side of the formica table but I do not want to take a chance and meet his eyes… a familiar animosity must be what warns me off… warnings that I realize are chewable I’m learning are better swallowed… I watch how this man expresses affront toward me without interrupting his focus on his cell phone… the formica table between us isn’t wide enough for him to have the distance from me he requires… this next  sensation has nothing to do with what he knows… though I react as if it could… his disgust is my own as I lie on my side my knees to my chest… in a bed I am a child with my mother her body moving… her body wrapped too close around me… nothing about this should surprise me… nothing is the space between one breath and the next… even if the space is decades long…

"
"

God started small                     At the first showdown

between good and evil       God didn’t come at anyone

like a cowboy       God didn’t open with solar flares

or asteroids       or mass extinction            or planetary heat death

God didn’t outgun anyone               God outmanned them

God made man        in the face of the beast

And in the face of the beast      God made     —from inside 

the great and gaping maw         while languishing

in the hot damp                           In the face of that 

great terror          God summoned the smallest—

adrenaline        serotonin        hemoglobin        oxytocin        motes

of possibility      God started by making—

light into land masses      sand into vessels      preservation

as civilization   and sometimes   God won

 

"
"

The soul, O ganders, flies beyond the parks

And far beyond the discords of the wind.

 

A bronze rain from the sun descending marks

The death of summer, which that time endures

 

Like one who scrawls a listless testament

Of golden quirks and Paphian caricatures,

 

Bequeathing your white feathers to the moon

And giving your bland motions to the air.

 

Behold, already on the long parades

The crows anoint the statues with their dirt.

 

And the soul, O ganders, being lonely, flies

Beyond your chilly chariots, to the skies.

 

"
"

It’s a strange courageyou give me, ancient star:

 Shine alone in the sunrisetoward which you lend no part!

 

                          I

Shine alone, shine nakedly, shine like bronze,

that reflects neither my face nor any inner part

of my being, shine like fire, that mirrors nothing.

 

                         II

Lend no part to any humanity that suffuses

you in its own light.

Be not chimera of morning,

Half-man, half-star.

Be not an intelligence,

Like a widow’s bird

Or an old horse.

 

"
"

Everything you thought you knew

must be relearned overnight.

 

How to walk.

Walk, not trip, over cords, 2x4s,

used coffee cups, concrete cores.

Walk, 40 pounds on your shoulder, across

rebar or a wood plank; glide,

not wobble, not look like the bounce

beneath each bootstep scares you.

 

How to dress yourself

to work outdoors all day midwinter

and keep warm, keep working, fingers moving;

or midsummer, with no hint of breasts.

 

How to climb ladders–

not a stepstool or a 4-footer–

ladders that stretch up two stories

where someone’s impatient

for that bundle of pipe.

 

How to get coffee–

hot and how they like it–to a crew

spread out 10 floors; to carry muffins

three blocks in a paper sack

through sheets of rain.

 

How to look.

To never go back empty-handed

when you’re told, Grab me a This/Thatfrom the gangbox, if all you’ve done

is move things around, poke here and there;

if you haven’t emptied out the full contents

so the journeyman won’t shame you

by finding This/That in a quick minute,

after you’ve said, We don’t have any. 

 

How to be dependable

but not predictable-provokable.

Not the lunch break entertainment.

 

How to read

blueprints,

delivery orders,

the mood on the job;

how long it’s okay to sit down for coffee;

how early you can start rolling up cords.

 

How to do well in school

from the back row

of a seats-assigned-Jim-Crow classroom

How to learn tricks-of-the-trade

from someone who does not like you.

 

How to listen, to act-don’t-ask.

To duck when someone motions, Duck! 

Or when someone tells you, Don’t talk to Zeke,

to know what they mean

so you don’t even look

at Zeke, the ironworker who’s always first out,

last in, standing there, so four times a day–

start, lunch, quit–all the workers walk past him,

like a sandbar, waves washing back and forth,

that catches debris.

 

How to pick up the phone and call your friend,

the only one of the women not at class

the night the apprenticeship director met you all

at the door

carrying the nervous rumor

that one of the women had been raped

and you all look at each other

and it wasn’t any of you five.

 

How to respond–within protocol–

when someone takes your ladder or tools,

imitates your voices on the loudspeaker,

spraypaints Cunt on your Baker staging,

urinates in your hardhat,

drives to your home

where you live alone

with your daughter

and keys your truck parked

in your own driveway.

 

Later, you’ll need the advanced skills:

how–without dislodging the keystone–

to humiliate a person, how to threaten

a person. Deftly.

So no one’s certain for absolute

that’s what happened. Not even you.

 

"
"

Her sister was shot, and hers found bludgeoned

dead in her car trunk; her mother was alcoholic,

and hers a suicide; her daughter killed by an uncle,

and hers stayed alive thanks to prison.

Before the term, date-raped, she was. Beforedomestic violence, love punched her face.

 

We wanted the career. Not just skills and money,

but structure, focus, printed plans, the rowdy order

of raising buildings that years later would still stand

right where you left them. We joined a tradition,

expected a well-marked path and a welcome.

The earnest ads never mentioned

 

we’d be human minesweepers steering around

barricades, sinkholes, lethal instructions, We learned

Solidarity was a corporation privately held.

Some left in shock. Some were maimed.

Some went missing. A few found gold.

 

Those with talent for sifting real threat from bluff,

or detecting hair-triggers before the blast, fared best,

We taught ourselves to disarm booby traps, shared

hand-drawn maps, and prepared for a long winter.

We lied on postcards home.  

 

"
"

In the moonlight

I met Berserk,

In the moonlight

On the bushy plain.

 

Oh, sharp he was

As the sleepless!

 

And, “Why are you red

In this milky blue?”

I said.

“Why sun-colored,

As if awake

In the midst of sleep?”

 

“You that wander,”

So he said,

“On the bushy plain,

Forget so soon.

But I set my traps

In the midst of dreams.”

 

I knew from this

That the blue ground

Was full of blocks

And blocking steel.

I knew the dread

Of the bushy plain,

And the beauty

Of the moonlight

Falling there,

Falling

As sleep falls

In the innocent air.

 

"
"

This is how the wind shifts:

Like the thoughts of an old human,

Who still thinks eagerly

And despairingly.

The wind shifts like this:

Like a human without illusions,

Who still feels irrational things within her.

The wind shifts like this:

Like humans approaching proudly,

Like humans approaching angrily.

This is how the wind shifts:

Like a human, heavy and heavy,

Who does not care.

"
"

Sister and mother and diviner love,

And of the sisterhood of the living dead

Most near, most clear, and of the clearest bloom,

And of the fragrant mothers the most dear

And queen, and of diviner love the day

And flame and summer and sweet fire, no thread

Of cloudy silver sprinkles in your gown

Its venom of renown, and on your head

No crown is simpler than the simple hair.

 

Now of the music summoned by the birth

That separates us from the wind and sea,

Yet leaves us in them, until earth becomes,

By being so much of the things we are,

Gross effigy and simulacrum, none

Gives motion to perfection more serene

Than yours, out of our imperfections wrought,

Most rare, or ever of more kindred air

In the laborious weaving that you wear.

 

For so retentive of themselves are men

That music is intensest which proclaims

The near, the clear, and vaunts the clearest bloom,

And of all vigils musing the obscure,

That apprehends the most which sees and names,

As in your name, an image that is sure,

Among the arrant spices of the sun,

O bough and bush and scented vine, in whom

We give ourselves our likest issuance.

 

Yet not too like, yet not so like to be

Too near, too clear, saving a little to endow

Our feigning with the strange unlike, whence

          springs

The difference that heavenly pity brings.

For this, musician, in your girdle fixed

Bear other perfumes. On your pale head wear

A band entwining, set with fatal stones.

Unreal, give back to us what once you gave:

The imagination that we spurned and crave.

"
"

Life contracts and death is expected,

As in a season of autumn.

The soldier falls.

 

He does not become a three-days personage,

Imposing his separation,

Calling for pomp.

 

Death is absolute and without memorial,

As in a season of autumn,

When the wind stops,

 

When the wind stops and, over the heavens,

The clouds go, nevertheless,

In their direction.

 

"
"

Capitán profundo, capitán geloso,

Ask us not to sing standing in the sun,

Hairy-backed and hump-armed,

Flat-ribbed and big-bagged.

 

There is no pith in music

Except in something false.

 

Bellissimo, pomposo,

Sing a song of serpent-kin,

Necks among the thousand leaves,

Tongues around the fruit.

Sing in clownish boots

Strapped and buckled bright.

 

Wear the breeches of a mask,

Coat half-flare and half galloon;

Wear a helmet without reason,

Tufted, tilted, twirled, and twisted.

Start the singing in a voice

Rougher than a grinding shale.

 

Hang a feather by your eye,

Nod and look a little sly.

This must be the vent of pity,

Deeper than a truer ditty

Of the real that wrenches,

Of the quick that’s wry.

 

"
"

I was cold and leaned against the big oak tree

as if it were my mother wearing a rough apron

of bark, her upraised arms warning of danger.

Through those boughs and leaves I saw

dark patches of sky. I thought a brooding

witch waited to catch me up from under

branches and take me, careening on her broom,

to her home in the jaundiced moon.

I looked to the roof of mom and dad's house

and wondered if the paisley couch patterns

would change during the day. My brother peeked

from a window and waved. When the bus came,

I pawed away from the trunk, fumbled,

and took my first step toward not returning.

"
"

My favorite is the cream puff lie,

the kind inflated with hot air,

expanded to make an heroic-sized story.

 

Another is the cannoli, a long lie,

well-packed with nutty details,

lightly wrapped in flakey truth.

 

A macaroon isn't a little white lie,

but it's covered

with self-serving coconut.

 

The apple tart carries slices

of sour gossip, only

slightly sweetened with truth.

 

Then there's the napoleon,

an Iago lie of pernicious intent,

layer upon layer of dark deceit.

"
"

My lost sister used to try the trick

with the tablecloth, waiting until

the wine had been poured, the gravy boat filled,

before snapping the linen her way

 

smug as a matador, staring down

silver and crystal that would dare move,

paying no mind to the ancestor gloom

gliding across the wallpaper like clouds

 

of a disapproving front—no hutch

or bureau spared, no lost sister sure

the trick would work this time, all those she loved

in another room, nibbling saltines,

 

or in the kitchen, plating the last

of the roast beef. How amazed they would be

to be called to the mahogany room

for supper, to find something missing,

 

something beautiful, finally, they could

never explain, the wine twittering

in its half-globes, candles aflutter, each

thing in its place, or so it seemed then,

 

even though their lives had changed for good.

"
"

""A cradle thief,"" my mother called the man

we'd see in shops, cafes, parks, even church,

with ""that poor girl"" beside him. Hand in hand,

they'd walk as if they didn't feel the scorch

of people's stares. The day we saw him press

his lips to hers, my mother blocked my eyes

as if his mouth (I longed for my first kiss)

against her mouth was smothering her cries.

All week, I ran a fever that wouldn't break.

""A cradle thief""—a voice I only half

knew as my own surprised me in the dark,

my sick-bed wet with shivers. ""A cradle thief,""

I said again, as if the words could will

my window broken, footprint on the sill.

 

"
"

So it has come to this –

insomnia at 3:15 A.M.,

the clock tolling its engine

 

like a frog following

a sundial yet having an electric

seizure at the quarter hour.

 

The business of words keeps me awake.

I am drinking cocoa,

the warm brown mama.

 

I would like a simple life

yet all night I am laying

poems away in a long box.

 

It is my immortality box,

my lay-away plan,

my coffin.

 

All night dark wings

flopping in my heart.

Each an ambition bird.

 

The bird wants to be dropped

from a high place like Tallahatchie Bridge.

 

He wants to light a kitchen match

and immolate himself.

 

He wants to fly into the hand of Michelangelo

and come out painted on a ceiling.

 

He wants to pierce the hornet’s nest

and come out with a long godhead.

 

He wants to take bread and wine

and bring forth a man happily floating in the Caribbean.

 

He wants to be pressed out like a key

so he can unlock the Magi.

 

He wants to take leave among strangers

passing out bits of his heart like hors d’oeuvres.

 

He wants to die changing his clothes

and bolt for the sun like a diamond.

 

He wants, I want.

Dear God, wouldn’t it be

good enough just to drink cocoa?

 

I must get a new bird

and a new immortality box.

There is folly enough inside this one.

 

"
"

1.

 

hear them cry

the long dead

the long gone

speak to us

from beyond the grave

guide us

that we may learn

all the ways

to hold tender this land

hard clay direct

rock upon rock

charred earth

in time

strong green growth

will rise here

trees back to life

native flowers

pushing the fragrance of hope

the promise of resurrection

 

2.

 

such then is beauty

surrendered

against all hope

you are here again

turning slowly

nature as chameleon

all life change

and changing again

awakening hearts

steady moving from

unnamed loss

into fierce deep grief

that can bear all burdens

even the long passage

into a shadowy dark

where no light enters

 

3.

 

night moves

through the thick dark

a heavy silence outside

near the front window

a black bear

stamps down plants

pushing back brush

fleeing manmade

confinement

roaming unfettered

confident

any place can become home

strutting down

a steep hill

as though freedom

is all

in the now

no past

no present

 

4.

 

earth works

thick brown mud

clinging pulling

a body down

heard wounded earth cry

bequeath to me

the hoe the hope

ancestral rights

to turn the ground over

to shovel and sift

until history

rewritten resurrected

returns to its rightful owners

a past to claim

yet another stone lifted to

throw against the enemy

making way for new endings

random seeds

spreading over the hillside

wild roses

come by fierce wind and hard rain

unleashed furies

here in this touched wood

a dirge a lamentation

for earth to live again

earth that is all at once a grave

a resting place a bed of new beginnings

avalanche of splendor

 

5.

 

small horses ride me

carry my dreams

of prairies and frontiers

where once

the first people roamed

claimed union with the earth

no right to own or possess

no sense of territory

all boundaries

placed by unseen ones

here I will give you thunder

shatter your hearts with rain

let snow soothe you

make your healing water

clear sweet

a sacred spring

where the thirsty

may drink

animals all

 

6.

 

listen little sister

angels make their hope here

in these hills

follow me

I will guide you

careful now

no trespass

I will guide you

word for word

mouth for mouth

all the holy ones

embracing us

all our kin

making home here

renegade marooned

lawless fugitives

grace these mountains

we have earth to bind us

the covenant

between us

can never be broken

vows to live and let live

 

"
"

When ice outside makes daggers of the grass,

I come to where the tides of life still flow.

The water here still moves behind the glass.

 

In here, the seasons never seem to pass—

the sullen shark and rays still come and go.

Outside the ice makes daggers of the grass

 

and coats the roads. The meditative bass

won't puzzle how the blustery blizzards blow.

The water here still moves. Behind the glass,

 

rose-tinted corals house a teeming mass

of busy neon creatures who don't know

""outside."" The ice makes daggers of the grass

 

and oily puddles into mirrors. Gas

freezes in its lines; my car won't go,

but water here still moves behind the glass.

 

No piles of valentines, no heart held fast—

just sea stars under lights kept soft and low.

Outside, the ice makes daggers of the grass;

in here, the water moves behind the glass.

 

"
"

Dreamer of purified fury and fabulous habit,

your eyes of deserted white afternoons

target, stiffen, riot with unicorn candor

so I swallow your body like meanings or whisky or as you swallow me.

 

Break rhythm here:      your kiss is my justice:

look then now how orange blooms of jubilation unfold in satisfied air!

This sex is more than sex, under the will of the God of sex,

so I softly invoke transformation of your rueful image of haven

–those frozen rocks, that guilty lighthouse isolate from temptation–

to warm Flemish landscape green and brighteyed with daisies of

     dizzying color

where pilgrims are dancing after gospelling bird who sing of

      new springs, good water.

 

"
"

Extricate, but not too much,

unfaithful digger of concordances,

let be the whole tasty clutch of it, rhyme

of I’m, not, awake,

child,

bequeathing willow trees beside a stream.

Not only old ravines

but Euclid Avenue,

my first escalator (Hal-ease Department Store)

were woven in the mat where sat the cat.

I say Department, was a sexual story

because Mother’s store it was, her bailiwick,

father absent in a void called “Work.”

Precarious. Don’t try get it all in. Bailey’s

was another tasty store, such glitterglass.

And later learned that testicles was store,

alaya-vijnana.

O dark dirty Cleveland, the Viking Club, the mysteries!

All I want is loving you and blank-blank blank-blank blank-blank

It’s only unmentionable because there’s no end to chasing it

the tale of it and you and sustenance.

Hundreds are fleeing, but not hurricanes.

Violets, I always brought her wild violets in spring.

Breathless romanzas secret in the Flats.

Percolate the spiderwebs.

Not what you expected, eh?

I could bite you back, you furry thing, but you’d never understand.

 

"
"

All life long

you are unhanding

unhanding and unhanding

what was handed you.

 

All life long

you throw out the line of life.

You throw out the line, stinging

up from your guts.

 

Were they planting trees,

your father and your mother?

Did they ever plant?

Is that a line of trees

far away

green line?

 

All life long

you include something

that includes your life.

You are in the egg.

 

                                          (                In the center of a picture,

                                          two angels hold a transparent crystal

                                          egg of teardrop shape. In the egg

                                          the ocean god is throned, left leg

                                          crossed over right, trident in right

                                          hand. Under his outstretched arms two

                                          children or little people stand, a boy

                                          at his right, a girl at his left. The

                                          boy’s head is crowned with a sun, the

                                          girl’s, with a crescent moon.

 

                                                         That’s the middle level of

                                          the picture. At the top a blazing

                                          sun with human features dominates the

                                          vertical axis. At the bottom a man

                                          and a woman kneel on either side a

                                          furnace, man to the right of the

                                          furnace, woman to the left. In the

                                          furnace itself, directly below the egg

                                          containing the god, is suspended a

                                          similar egg, empty.                            )

 

All life long

the dew falls from heaven

all life long

trees climb up from underground waters.

 

In the seed of the old god the new gods are swarming.

 

Earth is ready for planting.

 

The shut eye is opening.

 

The heat.

 

"
"

 I came here, being stricken, stumbling out

At last from streets; the sun, decreasing, took me

For days, the time being the last of autumn,

The thickets not yet stark, but quivering

With tiny colors, like some brush strokes in

The manner of the pointillists; small yellows

Dart shaped, little reds in different pattern,

Clicks and notches of color on threaded bushes,

A cracked and fluent heaven, and a brown earth.

I had these, and my food and sleep—enough.

 

This is a countryside of roofless houses,—

Taverns to rain,—doorsteps of millstones, lintels

Leaning and delicate, foundations sprung to lilacs.

Orchards where boughs like roots strike into the sky.

Here I could well devise the journey to nothing,

At night getting down from the wagon by the black barns,

The zenith a point of darkness, breaking to bits,

Showering motionless stars over the houses.

Scenes relentless—the black and white grooves of a woodcut.

 

But why the journey to nothing or any desire?

Why the heart taken by even senseless adventure,

The goal a coffer of dust?    Give my mouth to the air,

Let arrogant pain lick my flesh with a tongue

Rough as a cat’s; remember the smell of cold mornings,

The dried beauty of women, the exquisite skin

Under the chins of young girls, young men’s rough beards,—

The cringing promise of this one, that one’s apology

For the knife struck down to the bone, gladioli in sick rooms,

Asters and dahlias, flowers like ruches, rosettes. . .

 

Forever enough to part grass over the stones

By some brook or well, the lovely seed-shedding stalks;

To hear in the single wind diverse branches

Repeating their sounds to the sky—that sky like scaled mackerel,

Fleeing the fields—to be defended from silence,

To feel my body as arid, as safe as a twig

Broken away from whatever growth could snare it

Up to a spring, or hold it softly in summer

Or beat it under in snow.

 

                                                       I must get well.

Walk on strong legs, leap the hurdles of sense,  

Reason again, come back to my old patchwork logic,

Addition, subtraction, money, clothes, clocks,

Memories (freesias, smelling slightly of snow and of flesh

In a room with blue curtains) ambition, despair.

I must feel again who had given feeling over,

Challenge laughter, take tears, play the piano,

Form judgments, blame a crude world for disaster.

 

To escape is nothing.    Not to escape is nothing.

The farmer’s wife stands with a halo of darkness

Rounding her head.    Water drips in the kitchen

Tapping the sink.    To-day the maples have split

Limb from the trunk with the ice, a fresh wooden wound.

The vines are distorted with ice, ice burdens the breaking

Roofs I have told you of.

 

"
"

You have put your two hands upon me, and your mouth,

You have said my name as a prayer.

Here where trees are planted by the water

I have watched your eyes, cleansed from regret,

And your lips, closed over all that love cannot say,

 

         My mother remembers the agony of her womb

         And long years that seemed to promise more than this.

         She says, “You do not love me,

         You do not want me,

         You will go away.”

 

         In the country whereto I go

         I shall not see the face of my friend

         Nor her hair the color of sunburnt grasses;

         Together we shall not find

         The land on whose hills bends the new moon

         In air traversed of birds.

         

What have I thought of love?

I have said, “It is beauty and sorrow.”

I have thought that it would bring me lost delights, and splendor

As a wind out of old time. . .

 

But there is only the evening here,

And the sound of willows

Now and again dipping their long oval leaves in the water.

 

"
"

Nothing was remembered, nothing forgotten.

When we awoke, wagons were passing on the warm summer   

          pavements,

The window-sills were wet from rain in the night,

Birds scattered and settled over chimneypots

As among grotesque trees.

 

Nothing was accepted, nothing looked beyond.

Slight-voiced bells separated hour from hour,

The afternoon sifted coolness

And people drew together in streets becoming deserted.

There was a moon, and light in a shop-front,

And dusk falling like precipitous water.

 

Hand clasped hand

Forehead still bowed to forehead—

Nothing was lost, nothing possessed

There was no gift nor denial.

 

2.

I have remembered you.

You were not the town visited once,

Nor the road falling behind running feet.

 

You were as awkward as flesh

And lighter than frost or ashes.

 

You were the rind,

And the white-juiced apple,

The song, and the words waiting for music.

 

3.

You have learned the beginning;

Go from mine to the other.

 

Be together; eat, dance, despair,

Sleep, be threatened, endure.

You will know the way of that.

 

But at the end, be insolent;

Be absurd—strike the thing short off;

Be mad—only do not let talk

Wear the bloom from silence.

 

And go away without fire or lantern

Let there be some uncertainty about your departure.

 

"
"

Now that I know

How passion warms little

Of flesh in the mould,

And treasure is brittle,—

 

I’ll lie here and learn

How, over their ground,

Trees make a long shadow

And a light sound.

 

"
"

 I burned my life, that I might find

A passion wholly of the mind,

Thought divorced from eye and bone,

Ecstasy come to breath alone.

I broke my life, to seek relief

From the flawed light of love and grief.

 

With mounting beat the utter fire

Charred existence and desire.

It died low, ceased its sudden thresh.

I had found unmysterious flesh—

Not the mind’s avid substance—still

Passionate beyond the will.

 

 

"
"

My voice, not being proud

Like a strong woman’s, that cries

Imperiously aloud

That death disarm her, lull her—

Screams for no mourning color

Laid menacingly, like fire,

Over my long desire.

It will end, and leave no print.

As you lie, I shall lie:

Separate, eased, and cured.

Whatever is wasted or wanted

In this country of glass and flint

Some garden will use, once planted.

As you lie alone, I shall lie,

O, in singleness assured,

Deafened by mire and lime.

I remember, while there is time.

 

 

"
"

Love me because I am lost;

Love me that I am undone.

That is brave,—no man has wished it,

Not one.

 

Be strong, to look on my heart

As others look on my face.

Love me,—I tell you that it is a ravaged

Terrible place.

 

"
"

                                    I

You may have all things from me, save my breath,

The slight life in my throat will not give pause

For your love, nor your loss, nor any cause.

Shall I be made a panderer to death,

Dig the green ground for darkness underneath,

Let the dust serve me, covering all that was

With all that will be? Better, from time’s claws,

The hardened face under the subtle wreath.

 

Cooler than stones in wells, sweeter, more kind

Than hot, perfidious words, my breathing moves

Close to my plunging blood.    Be strong, and hang

Unriven mist over my breast and mind,

My breath! We shall forget the heart that loves,

Though in my body beat its blade, and its fang.

 

                                    II

I erred, when I thought loneliness the wide

Scent of mown grass over forsaken fields,

Or any shadow isolation yields.

Loneliness was the heart within your side.

Your thought, beyond my touch, was tilted air

Ringed with as many borders as the wind.

How could I judge you gentle or unkind

When all bright flying space was in your care?

 

Now that I leave you, I shall be made lonely

By simple empty days, never that chill

Resonant heart to strike between my arms

Again, as though distraught for distance,­–only

Levels of evening, now, behind a hill,

Or a late cock-crow from the darkening farms.

 

"
"

Since you would claim the sources of my thoughtRecall the meshes whence it sprang unlimed,The reedy traps which other hands have timedTo close upon it. Conjure up the hotBlaze that it cleared so cleanly, or the snowDevised to strike it down. It will be free.Whatever nets draw in to prison meAt length your eyes must turn to watch it go.

 My mouth, perhaps, may learn one thing too well,My body hear no echo save its own,Yet will the desperate mind, maddened and proud,Seek out the storm, escape the bitter spellThat we obey, strain to the wind, be thrownStraight to its freedom in the thunderous cloud.

 

"
"

The wind of night is mighty on the deep—

     A presence haunting sea and land again.

     That wind upon the watery waste hath been;

That wind upon the desert soon shall sweep.

O vast and mournful spirit, wherefore keep

     Thy vigil at the fleeting homes of men,

     Who need no voice of thine to tell them when

Is come the hour to labor or to sleep?

 

From waste to waste thou goest, and art dumb

     Before the morning. Patient in her tree

          The bird awaits until thy strength hath passed,

Forgetting darkness when the day is come.

     With other tidings hast thou burdened me,

          Whom desolations harbor at the last.

 

"
"

I

Without how small, within how strangely vast!

     What stars of terror had their path in thee!

     What music of the heavens and the sea

Lived in a sigh or thundered on the blast!

Here swept the gleam and pageant of the Past,

     As Beauty trembled to her fate’s decree;

     Here swords were forged for armies yet to be,

And tears were found too dreadful not to last.

 

Here stood the seats of judgment and its light,

     To whose assizes all our dreams were led—

          Our best and worst, our Paradise and Hell;

And in this room delivered now to night,

     The mortal put its question to the dead,

          And worlds were weighed, and God’s deep shadow fell.

 

II

Here an immortal river had its rise,

     Though dusty now the fountain whence it ran

     So swift and beautiful with good to man.

Here the foundation of an empire lies—

The ruins of a realm seen not with eyes,

     That now the vision of a gnat could scan.

     Here wars were fought within a little span,

Whose echoes yet resound on human skies.

 

Life, on her rainbow road from dust to dust,

     Spilt here her wildest iris, still thine own,

          Master, and with thy soul and ashes one!

Thy wings are distant from our years of lust,

     Yet he who liveth not by bread alone

          Shall see thee as that angel in the sun.

 

 

"
"

My mother the queen is dead.

      My father the king is old.

      He fumbles his cirque of gold

And dreams of a year long fled.

The young men stare at my face,

      But cannot meet my glance—

      Cavan tall as a lance,

Orra swift in the race.

 

Death was ever my price,

      Since my maidenhood began:

      At the thought of a Gaelic man

My heart is sister of ice.

’Tis another for whom I wait,

      Though I have not kissed his sword:

      He or none is my lord,

Though our night be soon or late.

 

The star grows great in my breast:

      It is crying clearly now

      To the star on the burnished prow

Of his galley far in the West.

The capes of the North are dim,

      And the windward beaches smoke

      Where the last long roller spoke

The tidings it held of him.

 

Sorrow I know he brings,

      Battle, despair and change,—

     Beauty cruel and strange,

And the shed bright blood of kings.

Breast, be white for his sake!

      Mouth, be red for the kiss!

      Soul, be strong for your bliss!

Heart, be ready to break!

 

"
"

                                   THE ORE

 

Before Man’s labouring wisdom gave me birth

I had not even seen the light of day;

Down in the central darkness of the earth,

Crushed by the weight of continents I lay,

Ground by the weight to heat, not knowing then

The air, the light, the noise, the world of men.

 

                                  THE TREES

We grew on mountains where the glaciers cry,

Infinite sombre armies of us stood

Below the snow-peaks which defy the sky;

A song like the gods moaning filled our wood;

We knew no men—our life was to stand staunch,

Singing our song, against the avalanche.

 

                         THE HEMP AND FLAX

 

We were a million grasses on the hill,

A million herbs which bowed as the wind blew,

Trembling in every fibre, never still;

Out of the summer earth sweet life we drew.

Little blue-flowered grasses up the glen,

Glad of the sun, what did we know of men?

 

                               THE WORKERS

 

We tore the iron from the mountain’s hold,

By blasting fires we smithied it to steel;

Out of the shapeless stone we learned to mould

The sweeping bow, the rectilinear keel;

We hewed the pine to plank, we split the fir,

We pulled the myriad flax to fashion her.

 

Out of a million lives our knowledge came,

A million subtle craftsmen forged the means;

Steam was our handmaid and our servant flame,

Water our strength, all bowed to our machines.

Out of the rock, the tree, the springing herb

We built this wandering beauty so superb.

  

                                 THE SAILORS

 

We, who were born on earth and live by air,

Make this thing pass across the fatal floor,

The speechless sea; alone we commune there

Jesting with death, that ever open door.

Sun, moon and stars are signs by which we drive

This wind-blown iron like a thing alive.

 

                                      THE SHIP

 

I march across great waters like a queen,

I whom so many wisdoms helped to make;

Over the uncruddled billows of seas green

I blanch the bubbled highway of my wake.

By me my wandering tenants clasp the hands,

And know the thoughts of men in other lands.

 

"
"

As unto lighter strains a boy might turn

     From where great altars burn

And Music’s grave archangels tread the night,

          So I, in seasons past,

          Loved not the bitter might

          And merciless control

Of thy bleak trumpets calling to the soul.

          Their consummating blast

     Held inspirations of affright,

               As when a faun

          Hears mournful thunders roll

On breathless, wide transparencies of dawn.

               Nor would I hear

          With thee, superb and clear

The indomitable laughter of the race;

               Nor would I face

Clean Truth, with her cold agates of the well,

               Nor with thee trace

Her footprints passing upward to the snows,

          But sought a phantom rose

And islands where the ghostly siren sings;

               Nor would I dwell

          Where star-forsaking wings

On mortal thresholds hide their mystery,

                    Nor watch with thee

The light of Heaven cast on common things.

 

But now in dreams of day I see thee stand

A grey, great sentry on the encompassed wall

That fronts the Night forever, in thy hand

               A consecrated spear

To test the dragons of man's ancient fear

               From secret gulfs that crawl—

          A captain of that choral band

Whose reverend faces, anxious of the Dark,

                    Yet undismayed

By rain of ruined worlds against the night,

               Turned evermore to hark

The music of God's silence, and were stayed

By something other than the reason’s light.

               And I have seen thee as

               An eagle, strong to pass

Where tempest-shapen clouds go to and fro

               And winds and noons have birth,

But whose regard is on the lands below

               And wingless things of earth.

               And yet not thine for long

The feignéd passion of the nightingale,

Nor shards of haliotis, nor the song

Of cymballed fountains hidden in the dale,

Nor gardens where the feet of Fragrance steal:

     ’Twas thine the laying-on to feel

Of tragic hands imperious and cold,

That grasping, led thee from the dreams of old,

               Making thee voyager

Of seas within the cosmic solitude,

Whose moons the long-familiar stars occlude,—

               Whose living sunsets stir

With visions of the timelessness we crave.

               And thou didst ride a wave

That gathered solemn music to its breast,

And breaking, shook our strand with thought’s unrest,

Till men far inland heard its mighty call

Where the young mornings leap the world’s blue wall.

 

                                                 *            *            *

 

Nature hath lonely voices at her heart

     And some thou heardst, for at thine own

          Were chords beyond all Art

That thrill but to the eternal undertone.

     But not necessitous to thee

The dreams that were when Arcady began

Or Paphos soared in iris from the sea;

                         For thou couldst guess

The rainbows hidden in the frustrate slime,

               And sawst in crownless Man

               A Titan scourged thro’ Time

With pains and raptures of his loneliness.

               And thou wast wanderer

In that dim House that is the human heart,

               Where thou didst roam apart,

               Seeing what pillars were

Between its deep foundations and the sun,

               What halls of dream undone,

What seraphs hold compassionate their wings

Between the youth and bitterness of things,

                    Ere all see clear

The gain in loss, the triumph in the tear.

 

Time’s whitest loves lie radiant in thy song,

Like starlight on an ocean, for thine own

     Was as a deathless lily grown

In Paradise—ethereal and strong.

                         And to thine eyes

Earth had no earth that held not haughty dust,

And seeds of future harvestings in trust,

And hidden azures of eventual skies.

               Yet hadst thou sharper strains,

Even as the Power determines us with pains,

And seeing harvests, sawst as well the chaff,

And seeing Beauty, sawst her shames no less,

                    Loosing the sweet,

     High thunder of thy Jovian laugh

On souls purblind in their self-righteousness.

               O vision wide and keen!

Which knew, untaught, that pains to joyance are

               As night unto the star

That on the effacing dawn must burn unseen.

               And thou didst know what meat

               Was torn to give us milk,

What countless worms made possible the silk

               That robes the mind, what plan

Drew as a bubble from old infamies

               And fen-pools of the past

The shy and many-colored soul of man.

               Yea! thou hast seen the lees

In that rich cup we lift against the day,

Seen the man-child at his disastrous play—

               His shafts without a mark,

His fountains flowing downward to the dark,

               His maiming and his bars,

                    Then turned to see

His vatic shadow cast athwart the stars,

And his strange challenge to infinity.

 

               But who am I to speak,

Far down the mountain, of its altar-peak,

               Or cross on feeble wings,

Adventurous, the oceans in thy mind?

We of a wider day’s bewilderings

               For very light seem blind,

And fearful of the gods our hands have formed.

               Some lift their eyes and seem

To see at last the lofty human scheme

Fading and topping as a sunset stormed

By wind and evening, with the stars in doubt.

And some cry, “On to Brotherhood!” And some

                (Their Dream's high music dumb):“Nay! let us hide in roses all our chains,               Tho’ all the lamps go out!               Let us accept our lords! Time’s tensions move not save to subtler pains.” 

And over all the Silence is as swords. …

Wherefore be near us in our day of choice,

               Lest Hell’s red choirs rejoice;

               And may our counsels be

More wise, more kindly, for the thought of thee;

               And may our deeds attest

               Thy covenant of fame

To men of after-years that see thy name

Held like a flower by Honor to her breast.

Thy station in our hearts long since was won—

              Safe from the jealous years—

Thou of whose love, thou of whose thews and tears

We rest most certain when the day is done

And formless shadows close upon the sun!

Thou wast a star ere death’s long night shut down,

               And for thy brows the crown

Was graven ere the birth-pangs, and thy bed

Is now of hallowed marble, and a fane

               Among the mightier dead:

More blameless than thine own what soul hath stood?

Dost thou lie deaf until another Reign,

               Or hear as music o’er thy head

The ceaseless trumpets of the war for Good?

                    Ah, thou! ah, thou!

               Stills God thy question now?

 

"
"

I saw the racer coming to the jump,

     Staring with fiery eyeballs as he rusht,

I heard the blood within his body thump,

     I saw him launch, I heard the toppings crusht.

And as he landed I beheld his soul

     Kindle, because, in front, he saw the Straight

With all its thousands roaring at the goal,

     He laughed, he took the moment for his mate.

Would that the passionate moods on which we ride

     Might kindle thus to oneness with the will;

Would we might see the end to which we stride,

     And feel, not strain in struggle, only thrill,

And laugh like him and know in all our nerves

Beauty, the spirit, scattering dust and turves.

 

"
"

Here, in this darkened room of this old house,

     I sit beside the fire.     I hear again,

Within, the scutter where the mice carouse,

     Without, the gutter dropping with the rain.

Opposite, are black shelves of wormy books,

     To left, glazed cases, dusty with the same,

Behind, a wall, with rusty guns on hooks,

     To right, the fire, that chokes one panting flame.

Over the mantel, black as funeral cloth,

     A portrait hangs, a man, whose flesh the worm

Has mawed this hundred years, whose clothes the moth

     A century since, has channelled to a term.

I cannot see his face :  I only know

He stares at me, that man of long ago.

 

I light the candles in the long brass sticks,

     I see him now, a pale-eyed, simpering man,

Framed in carved wood, wherein the death-watch ticks,

     A most dead face :  yet when the work began

That face, the pale puce coat, the simpering smile,

     The hands that hold a book, the eyes that gaze,

Moved to the touch of mind a little while.

     The painter sat in judgment on his ways :

The painter turned him to and from the light,

     Talked about art, or bade him lift his head.

Judged the lips’ paleness and the temples’ white,

     And now his work abides ;  the man is dead.

But is he dead ?  This dusty study drear

Creaks in its panels that the man is here.

 

Here, beyond doubt, he lived, in that old day.

     “He was a Doctor here,” the student thought.

Here, when the puce was new, that now is grey,

     That simpering man his daily practice wrought.

Here he let blood, prescribed the pill and drop,

     The leech, the diet ;  here his verdict given

Brought agonies of hoping to a stop,

     Here his condemned confessioners were shriven.

What is that book he holds, the key, too dim

     To read, to know ;  some little book he wrote,

Forgotten now, but still the key to him.

     He sacrificed his vision for his coat.

I see the man ;  a simpering mask that hid

A seeing mind that simpering men forbid.

 

Those are his books no doubt, untoucht, undusted,

     Unread, since last he left them on the shelves,

Octavo sermons that the fox has rusted,

     Sides splitting off from brown decaying twelves.

This was his room, this darkness of old death,

     This coffin-room with lights like embrasures,

The place is poisonous with him ;  like a breath

     On glass, he stains the spirit ;  he endures.

Here is his name within the sermon book,

     And verse, “When hungry Worms my Body eat” ;

He leans across my shoulder as I look,

     He who is God or pasture to the wheat.

He who is Dead is still upon the soul

     A check, an inhibition, a control.

 

I draw the bolts.     I am alone within.

     The moonlight through the coloured glass comes faint,

Mottling the passage wall like human skin,

     Pale with the breathings left of withered paint.

But others walk the empty house with me,

     There is no loneliness within these walls

No more than there is stillness in the sea

     Or silence in the eternal waterfalls.

There in the room, to right, they sit at feast ;

     The dropping grey-beard with the cold blue eye,

The lad, his son, that should have been a priest,

     And he, the rake, who made his mother die.

And he, the gambling man, who staked the throw,

They look me through, they follow when I go.

 

They follow with still footing down the hall,

     I know their souls, those fellow-tenants mine,

Their shadows dim those colours on the wall,

     They point my every gesture with a sign.

That grey-beard cast his aged servant forth

     After his forty years of service done,

The gambler supped up riches as the north

     Sups with his death the glories of the sun.

The lad betrayed his trust ;  the rake was he

     Who broke two women’s hearts to ease his own :

They nudge each other as they look at me,

     Shadows, all our, and yet as hard as stone.

And there, he comes, that simpering man, who sold

His mind for coat of puce and penny gold.

 

O ruinous house, within whose corridors

     None but the wicked and the mad go free.

(On the dark stairs they wait, behind the doors

     They crouch, they watch, or creep to follow me.)

Deep in old blood your ominous bricks are red,

     Firm in old bones your walls’ foundations stand,

With dead men’s passions built upon the dead,

     With broken hearts for lime and oaths for sand.

Terrible house, whose horror I have built,

     Sin after sin, unseen, as sand that slips

Telling the time, till now the heaped guilt

     Cries, and the planets circle to eclipse.

You only are the Daunter, you alone

Clutch, till I feel your ivy on the bone.

 

"
"

Before the unseen cock had called the time,

     Those workers left their beds and stumbled out

Into the street, where dust lay white as lime

     Under the last star that keeps bats about.

Then blinking still from bed, they trod the street,

     The doors closed up and down ;  the traveller heard

Doors opened, closed, then silence, then men’s feet

     Moving to toil, the men too drowsed for word.

The bean-field was a greyness as they passed,

     The darkness of the hedge was starred with flowers,

The moth, with wings like dead leaves, sucked his last,

     The triumphing cock cried out with all his powers ;

His fire of crying made the twilight quick,

Then clink, clink, clink, men’s trowels tapped the brick.

 

I saw the delicate man who built the tower

     Look from the turret at the ground below,

The granite column wavered like a flower,

     But stood in air whatever winds might blow.

Its roots were in the rock, its head stood proud,

     No earthly forest reared a head so high ;

Sometimes the eagle came there, sometimes cloud,

     It was man’s ultimate footstep to the sky.

And in that peak the builder kept his treasure,

     Books with the symbols of his art, the signs

Of knowledge in excitement, skill in pleasure,

     The edge that cut, the rule that kept the lines.

He who had seen his tower beneath the grass,

Rock in the earth, now smiled, because it was.

 

How many thousand men had done his will,  

     Men who had hands, or arms, or strength to spend,

Or cunning with machines, or art, or skill !

     All had obeyed him, working to this end.      

Hundreds in distant lands had given their share

     Of power, to deck it ;  on its every stone

Their oddity of pleasure was laid bare,

     Yet was the tower his offspring, his alone.

His inner eye had seen, his will had made it,

     All the opposing army of men’s minds

Had bowed, had turned, had striven as he bade it,

     Each to his purpose in their myriad kinds.

Now it was done, and in the peak he stood

Seeing his work, and smiled to find it good.

 

It had been stone, earth’s body, hidden deep,

     Lightless and shapeless, where it cooled and hardened.

Now it was as the banner on man’s keep

     Or as the Apple in Eden where God gardened.

Lilies of stone ran round it, and like fires

     The tongues of crockets shot from it and paused,

Horsemen who raced were carven on’t, the spires

     Were bright with gold ;  all this the builder caused.

And standing there, it seemed that all the hive

     Of human skill which now it had become,

Was stone no more, nor building, but alive,

     Trying to speak, this tower that was dumb,

 Trying to speak, nay, speaking, soul to soul

With powers who are, to raven or control

 

"
"

Part of suffering is the useless urge to announce that you’re suffering.

 

There is no other way to say it: I’m suffering. Just to say “I suffer”

helps.

 

I read somewhere, “we become lyrical when we suffer.”

 

Happiness is suffering for the right reasons.

 

First-order suffering is second-order happiness.

 

You have to suffer for beauty? Because you have to suffer.

 

We pride ourselves on a high quality of suffering.

 

Turgenev was born in 1818 in the Province of Orel, and suffered

during his childhood from a tyrannical mother.

 

In the past their suffering was less absurd.

 

The problem is, everything’s worse. Like, paper or plastic? We’re all

still going to die suffering.

 

I value being alone with my thoughts, but it’s weird to say, “This

thing that makes us suffer less, we have to stop doing it.”

 

Isn’t it kind of the point of culture to assuage our feeling needless

and alone?

 

How does one suffer “gladly,” exactly?

 

At least the rich get to suffer in comfort.

 

It makes the life feel longer. Live to suffer another day.

 

One’s past suffering can be a great source of comfort. A torturous

luxury. Velvet upholstery.

 

Suffering is happiness, after forty minutes of desolate shuffling. The

point is, life is suffering.

 

About suffering, no one is ever wrong.

 

"
"

growing into ourselves

earnest and funny we were

angels of some kind, smiling visitors

the light we lived in was gorgeous

we looked up and into the camera

the ordinary things we did with our hands

or how we turned and walked

or looked back we lifted the child

spooned food into his mouth

the camera held it, stayed it

there we are in our lives as if

we had all time

as if we would stand in that room

and wear that shirt those glasses

as if that light

without end

would shine on us

and from us.

 

"
"

First day of February,

and in the far corner of the yard

the Adirondack chair,

blown over by the wind at Christmas,

is still on its back,

the snow too deep for me

to traipse out and right it,

the ice too sheer

to risk slamming these old bones

to the ground.

In a hospital bed in her room

where her bed used to be,

and her husband,

my Aunt Millie keeps reaching up

for the far corner of the room,

whispering That is so interesting.I will go now.

In April

I will walk out

across the warming grass,

and right the chair

as if there had never been anything

to stop me in the first place,

listening for the buzz of hummingbirds

which reminds me of how fast

things are capable of moving.

"
"

Abandoned house roofless three walls

no floor a ruin if you think house—

 

to brown towhees a place to scratch

in the leaves for bugs and worms,

 

for the male to sing a territorial song

from what remains of the chimney—

 

an imagination problem like the time

friends said we must be very happy

 

in the beautiful house we built because

they couldn't see the ruins inside us.

"
"

Where in the world

does my mother go, eyes

shut so tight her lower lashes

curl in toward a view

that's hers alone?

Yesterday she told

me—after the rains, the windscame, and this morning

that's what they do.

"
"

The storm was headed in our direction—

big loom of gray like the absolute West

leaned over us. Reports of damage

in the neighboring counties—a silo unfurled

and took wing, a house trailer

twisted loose. On the Doppler screen

the storm looked alive, yellow and green

at the fringes, with a fierce red heart

trending to violet. Sirens swept over

to scare it away, like songbirds

grow strident, circle and bluff

at the sight of an owl.

When the rain came in sheets,

I regretted my sins. When lightning

cracked the red pine's half-rotted heart,

I wished the world more joy

in general. When the worst was over

and the grass lay flat, but alive,

and the sky was a waning bruise,

I thought of that silo, how it wasn't mine,

and all that grain cast back into the world's

wind, maybe some of it still flying.

"
"

 the unknown has hold of me and its grip is strong as honey on the underside of a spoon   

 

the unknown i mean is not the usual one the future the tomorrow of survival         

 

but the past and what happened in the name of the name after mine and in the name of the name before mine     

 

i do not know enough to speak i do not know enough to remain silent        

 

there is a fear that holds me and it sounds like wind it sounds like katydids in catalpa        

 

ah the tall grass of the days before i knew there was a before me    

 

where do i live if there’s no home remaining

 

where do i live if the home i helped build can never be mine and the one i was born into never was         

 

"
"

magnolias & forsythia blossom

from yr Sugar Hill/ Ray Drummond

plays nasty riffs & i imagine

alla the Palm Cafe turns out

when you glow at dusk on

Convent Avenue/ slidin easily by

the just-for-us propositions Gylan Kain

fashioned at every other Harlem corner/

we usedta leave deluxe issues of

love potions/ remedies even insinuations

danglin from Baptist steeples/ Methodist steps

jump back/ jump up/ beatin down/ flyin

yng wenches whose skirts still

tease solos over to the Savoy/

 

        (you cd make yrself irresistible/ be my

            Willis Avenue Bridge/ floatin/ Rican wet

               su lengua dulce/ over an East River of

                 gardenias/ remember the minor sixth)

you hummed to me while I was

reachin for the/ ceilin/ where our

folks was carryin on before Michelangelo

or Lionel Richie/ some where round there

where you brush up gainst baobabs/ well

                 (you know where my beauty marks are/ all

over

HARLEM)

we sing like flowers/ i see

round brown honies giggle at us/ the

silly/ niggahness of yr quick light

kisses/ cómo fresh/ mi chabalo negro/ mi propio Tito

Puente/

       my own rhythm section/ that petal

   opening every time yr lips/ let

love/ cada vez / yr lips

let love fall/ all

over

Sugar Hill

        

"
"

it hasnt always been this way

ellington was not a street

robeson no mere memory

du bois walked up my father’s stairs

hummed some tune over me

sleeping in the company of men

who changed the world

 

it wasnt always like this

why ray barretto used to be a side-man

& dizzy’s hair was not always grey

i remember            i was there

i listened in the company of men

politics as necessary as collards

music even in our dreams

 

our house was filled with all kinda folks

our windows were not cement or steel

our doors opened like our daddy’s arms

held us safe & loved

children growing in the company of men

old southern men & young slick ones

sonny til was not a boy

the clovers no rag-tag orphans

our crooners/ we belonged to a whole world

nkrumah was no foreigner

virgil aikens was not the only fighter

 

it hasnt always been this way

ellington was not a street

 

"
"







(for gail, tracie & viola)







whatever shall i do with my dead

my tombs & mausoleums

these potted plants tended by strangers

over yr eyes        closed

maybe dreaming      dead/ loved

so particularly       i dont know

what to do with you

 

shall i see you dancin/

hold yr child askin/       what’s mammy like

should i sleep with yr husband

who sees yr childself in my memories

yr mother       will she bosom talk me to death with you

pretend she has been no mother

our smokey robinson fantasies set aside

recollections comin to no good end

 

grandma/ grandma

must i ride with yr daughters to sit

in the cemetery on sunny days/ weedin

yr womb/ wdnt it be better if i stayed

in my kitchen/ makin gumbo/ codfish cakes

watchin edge of nite/

rubbin me hands of my apron/ hummin

his eye is on the sparrow

yr photograph at 25 is on my wall

awready you had given yr woman over/

no one wd know you/ only mama is remembered

when waz there more

i shall not lie fondling a dead man’s love

bakin apples for a locket jammed with hair from

a head no longer arrogant

but what shall i do

with my dead/ loved so particularly

leavin me/ specifically

 

some never stop breathin

wantin kisses

some disappear/ slammin the door

bangin the phone

one went off in a VW bus/ another

stole my sleep

 

i sit here drinking memories

entertainin ghosts/ longin for arms

no longer warm/ too enchanted

to tend the pulse pushin me on

to go off from you/ my dead & loved ones

 

when i meet a someone/ i must know

i place you round me like a court of holy seers

if this stranger is to have a space in my life

she must pull yr spirits to her own

for i wander regularly in moments of the dead

if you wd have me speak

you must learn the tongue of my dead & loved ones

i have been left behind

a survivor

holdin out for more

 

"
"

my grandpa waz a doughboy from carolina

the other a garveyite from lakewood

i got talked to abt the race & achievement

bout color & propriety/

nobody spoke to me about the moon

 

daddy talked abt music & mama bout christians

my sisters/ we

always talked & talked

there waz never quiet

trees were status symbols

 

i’ve taken to fog/

the moon still surprisin me

 

"
"







(for beverly)







when i write    i think of my friends

the people of my visions

but how cd i presume to think of men

who leave so little behind     i find them

in my wash cloth    in the dirty dishes

by my unmade bed

when i write i erase these dark halls

lone subway stops   the car followin

too closely    how cd i presume

to address my self

to men

they leave so little behind

& still i dont remember.

 

once a poet

delivered valentino

on a tie-dyed sheet w/

tequila passion

the sheik gallopin a desert for me

another sketched me

in the midst of bougainvillea

another saturated my basement with painted skeletons

long ago a poet

telephoned from ny

to have breakfast

in seattle

 

i’ve waded in hidden creeks

with the men i remember

the others had no sense of humor

 

"
"

      st. louis/ such a colored town/ a whiskey

black space of history & neighborhood/ forever ours/

      to lawrenceville/ where the only road open

to me/ waz cleared by colonial slaves/ whose children never

moved/ never seems like/ mended the torments of the Depression

the stains of demented spittle/ dropped from lips of crystal women/

still makin independence flags/

      from st. louis/ on a halloween’s eve to the veiled prophet/

usurpin the mystery of mardi gras/ made it mine tho the queen

waz always fair/ that parade/ of pagan floats & tambourines/

commemoratin me/ unlike the lonely walks wit liberal trick or

treaters/ back to my front door/ bag half empty/

      my face enuf to scare anyone i passed/ a colored kid/

whatta gas                    1) here                       a tree                      wonderin the horizon                      dipped in blues &                      untended bones                      usedta hugs drawls                      rhythm & decency                      here a tree                      waitin to be hanged

 

       sumner high school/ squat & pale on the corner/ like

our vision/ waz to be vague/ our memory

of the war/ that made us free to be forgotten

becomin paler/ a linear movement from south carolina

to missouri/ freedman/ landin in jackie wilson’s yelp/ daughters of

the manumitted swimmin in tina turner’s grinds/ this is chuck

berry’s town/ disavowin misega-nation/ in any situation/ & they let

us be/ electric blues & bo diddley’s cant/ rockin pneumonia &

boogie-woogie flu/ the slop & short-fried heads/ running always to

the river

 

               / from chambersbourg/ lil italy/ i passed everyday

at the sweet shoppe/ & waz afraid/ the cops raided truants/

regularly/ after dark i wd not be seen/ wit any other colored/

sane/ lovin my life/

            in the 'bourg/ seriously expectin to be gnarled/

hey niggah/ over here/

             & behind the truck lay five hands claspin chains/

round the trees/ 4 more sucklin steel/

                                                                   hey niggah/ over here/

this is the borderline/

a territorial dispute/

 

                                                                   hey/ niggah/

over here/

               cars loaded wit families/ fellas from the factory/ one or two

practical nurses/ black/ become our trenches/ some dig into cement

wit elbows/ under engines/ do not be seen/ in yr hometown/ after

sunset we suck up our shadows/

              2) i will sit here

                   my shoulders brace an enormous oak                         dreams waddle in my lap                         round to miz bertha’s where lil richard                         gets his process                         runs backwards to the rosebushes/ a drunk man/ lyin                         down the block to the nuns in pink habits                         prayin in a pink chapel                         my dreams run to meet aunt marie                         my dreams draw blood from ol sores                                    these stains & scars are mine                                                this is my space                                                         i am not movin

 

 

"
"







(for david)







these kisses are clandestine

no one can see them

i hold them in my hand

shd i be discovered/

i stick them in my hair & my head gets hot

so i haveta excuse myself

 

under no circumstances

can the legs that slip over my hips

leave tellin marks/ scents

of love/ this wd be unpardonable

so i am all the time

rubbin my arms/ exposing myself

to river mists/ to mask the sweetness

you leave me swillin in

 

i cant allow you to look at me

how you do so i am naked & wantin

to be explored like a honeysuckle patch

when you look at me how you do so

i am all lips & thigh/

my cover is blown & the kisses

run free/ only to hover sulkin over

yr cheek/ while i pretend

they are not mine

cuz its happenin/ but you dont know abt it

 

this kisses they take a slow blues walk

back to me

in the palm of my hand

they spread out/ scratch kick curse & punch

til my skin cries/

kisses raisin hell/ in my fists/

they fly out mad & eager

they’ll fly out mad & eager

if you look at me how you do so i am naked

& wantin/ if you look at me how you do so

i am all lips & thigh/

they gonna fly out mad & eager

they fly out & climb on you

the kisses/ they

flyin

if you look at me

how you do so

 

"
"

In zero cold the engine's slow

to turn over, coughing

awake like my father sitting on the edge

of the bed staring at the blue linoleum floor,

coughing again, lifting his heavy body

into another day on the railroad section gang,

the icy wind through Lehigh Gap blasting

down on him as he raises the sledge hammer

and strains against the crowbar.

But now he's drinking coffee,

looking toward the dark window,

thinking of what?

Maybe watching Friday Night Fights

or ordering tomato seeds,

maybe the ghostly face in the window

staring back at him.

"
"

A bed sheet hung out to dry

became a screen for shadow animals.

But of all laundry days in the neighborhood

the windy ones were best,

the clothespins like little men riding

lines that tried to buck them off.

One at a time we ran down the aisles

between snapping sheets

that wanted to put us in our place.

Timing them, you faked and cut

like famous halfbacks. But if a sheet

tagged you it put you down, pinned

by the whiteness floating

against a sky washed by the bluing

our mothers added to the wash water.

Could anyone make it through those days

untouched? You waited for

your chance, then jumped up and finished

the course, rising if you fell again.

Later, let the sky darken suddenly

and we'd be sent out to empty the lines.

All up and down the block, kids

running with bed sheets in their arms,

running like firemen rescuing children.

All night those sheets lay draped

over furniture, as though we were leaving

and would not return for a long time.

"
"

I will donate my head

I will uncover the seams

I will acknowledge my dust

           as silver elixir

to be fed to the masses

I’ve never been more dead than now

more a product of misspent music

         halted at the border

                     flicking seeds sent

through a blister in the wall

I plant movements

that carry all the king’s men

through a crack in the planet

where monkeys sink into

a song their fathers grew

           on filaments of language

& certain birds

are mad to hunt a spectrum

          of only one meaning

where handmade clouds sound    

free from ligament

                      released beyond bounds

offering steam to relax gem

I can float here combing my hair into waterfall

I am a human fly

wings slick with telepathic goo

an archive of earth piled on my back

This is theater ...

so please assume the role of curtain

I am the director of this fuzz

a tardy imago: the result of clandestine flare

When we returned to your house

we noticed that it wasn’t there

so we built a human pyramid

without flesh

without internal radar or private song

           a formation known to drain the color of black suns

and toward this stone we lean

where birds are higher

than sapphire mammatus

where we speak of things mouth-less, bare

"
"

I pass a woman on the beach.

We both wear graying hair,

feel sand between our toes,

hear surf, and see blue sky.

I came with a smile.

She came to get one.

No.  I'm wrong.

She sits on a boulder

by a cairn of stacked rocks.

Hands over her heart,

she stares out to sea.

Today's my turn to hold the joy,

hers the sorrow.

"
"

I rocked in a chair of charred Grand Dragon’s bones,

legs silent as molasses drooling from a cloud of linen.

My fat white maid in her potholder hat

did not watch me watch her sons

molt like dandelions in la-di-da noon

standing squarely on the blacks of their own shadows as they willed.

She crushed lemons in her bear claw fists

and pushed a sugar dust around the pitcher.

The mister started in on the mare,

phantasm of a centaur where it splinters.

Three latticed glasses harmonized on the platter:

my quiet kindness to the albess

for where I sent her daughter.

It was Saturday. There was salt in his seams

and the slip between my knees slumped with heat

and sheets jedidiah-teething the clothesline already.

Followed hours full of our trying to be full of each other

and sunlight yearning like egg white through

the cracked curtains

and the usual evidence of bluegrass his shoulders shed

beneath my nails, the rooms in me he could not enter

branching annexes: my elderberry privacies.

Out of the yard’s farthest hem, darkness

from the world’s first days braided into the tobacco

and I could only imagine tomorrow

if I expected to be slaughtered in my sleep.

"
"

All my life I’ve asked my master

Why I am unable to choose

This sweet man or fancy shoes

Over this stranger, more difficult lover

And these expensive but practical loafers

And why I am unable to author

A book exhibiting my full potential

And have focused instead on inconsequential

Letters to strange and difficult lovers

Who by my letters were never changed.

I certainly haven’t been constrained

By terrible parents or trauma or poverty

And even if I had it wouldn’t explain

My propensity for misery

Anymore than it would my

Propensity for joy.

Maybe I’m just a procrastinator

As life is a procrastination of death

And each breath just a procrastination of breath

And friends a procrastination of work

And work a procrastination of love

And love a procrastination I’m just not above.

"
"

Grab lunch

Polish your silver

Try a new flavor of yogurt

Burn in a lake of fire

Smoke some weed

Overeat

Finally understand some things

Talk to Steve

Cry out breathlessly

Pay the electric bill

Go to the aquarium in the mall

Worry over the shape and color of your moles

Sell out the people you used to call friends

Learn how to bake bread

Feed the ducks at the lake by the highway

Exaggerate your earnings

Get elected

Mull things over

Attend a livestock auction

Pull down the statues of people who tortured your ancestors

Seek employment

Knit

Regret mostly everything

Paint the windows shut

Pull down the statues of your ancestors

Get down on your knees

Read Kierkegaard

Pick the kids up from Montessori

Lose your appetite

Linger

Imagine that hell is only an abstraction

DVR Homeland

Take another free breath mint

Cry out endlessly

Blame those closest to you

Love even the barest light pissing through the trees 

"
"

The commentator's rabbiting on and on

about how it's so easy for Roger, resentment

thick as butter still in a box. Yet word

from those who've done their homework

is how the man loves to train—how much

he relishes putting in the hours

just as magicians shuffle card after card,

countless to mere humans

but carefully all accounted for.

At hearing ""luck"" again, I stop

until my hands relax their clutch

on the cone from which a dozen more

peonies are to materialize. I make it look easy

to grow a garden on top of a sheet

of fondant, and that's how it should appear:

as natural and as meant-to-be

as the spin of a ball from the sweetest spot

of a racquet whisked through the air like a wand.

"
"

The stone dolls, found in an Egyptian tomb,

are eyeless, armless, heavy for a child

to hold. Not like the dolls that lined the room

my sister and I shared, their bodies light

and made for being bent, their eyelids mobile,

hair that tangled with our own. ""At night,""

our father winked at us, ""they come to life.""

We never pressed our cheeks against cold stone

as pharoah's daughters did. The doctor's knife

could not have caught my sister more off-guard

or left me less alone; I had my dolls.

Though, soon, they lay on tables in the yard

with price tags. Even then they looked alive,

survivors with no sickness to survive.

"
"

When they entered the house, which was a very large house

the way a cloud is large, the pages of their story

seemed like cracks in the earth, a man's shirt, or a woman's

blouse, and the stranger in the house told them to make

themselves at home in the house that was not their house,

and told them to write down the three most important gifts

in each of their lives, and then continued to explain how

there were three doors in the house and at each door they must

forfeit one of these gifts, and how the real story always begins

at the third door, where each of them will pause and begin

to crawl, leaving the field of time, where now you pause,

touching the door of this page, wiping away each word, waiting to enter.

 

"
"

Even now it idles outside the houses

where we failed to get better at piano lessons,

visits the parking lot of the ballet school

 

where my sister and I stood awkwardly

at the back. My mother's van was orange

with a door we slid open to reveal

beheaded plastic dragons and bunches

 

of black, half-eaten bananas; it was where

her sketchbooks tarried among

abandoned coffee cups and

 

science projects. She meant to go places

in it: camp in its back seat

and cook on its stove while

 

painting the coast of Nova Scotia,

or capturing the cold beauty of the Blue Ridge

mountains at dawn. Instead, she waited

behind its wheel while we scraped violins,

 

made digestive sounds

with trumpets, danced badly at recitals

where grandmothers recorded us

 

with unsteady cameras. Sometimes, now,

I look out a window and believe I see it,

see her, waiting for me beside a curb,

 

under a tree, and I think I could open the door,

clear off a seat, look at the drawing in her lap,

which she began, but never seemed to finish.

"
"

I sit with my thermos of coffee on the mall:

a mile-long promenade, arcades of elms

flanking a generous aliquot of benches.

 

But at this early hour it starts to dawn:

I am the only one without a dog.

So, a witness to an ancient symbiosis,

as it's evolved within a modern city:

 

The dogs, I note, are smaller, the owners

less ferocious. The former sniff then poop,

the latter, like potty-training parents, pat their heads,

gather it in plastic doggy-bags.

 

It's no longer for the hunt or for protection;

both species have adapted to survive

hard loneliness inside a small apartment.

 

"
"

Somewhere recently

I lost my short-term memory.

It was there and then it moved

like the flash of a red fox

along a line fence.

 

My short-term memory

has no address but here

no time but now.

It is a straight-man, waiting to speak

to fill in empty space

with name, date, trivia, punch line.

And then it fails to show.

 

It is lost, hiding somewhere out back

a dried ragweed stalk on the Kansas Prairie

holding the shadow of its life

against a January wind.

 

How am I to go on?

I wake up a hundred times a day.

Who am I waiting for

what am I looking for

why do I have this empty cup

on the porch or in the yard?

I greet my neighbor, who smiles.

I turn a slow, lazy Susan

in my mind, looking for

some clue, anything to break the spell

of being lost in plain sight.

"
"

“I’m interested in feminist oratory,” we think

Jess should say

“Specifically that.”

 

Yellow-breasted engine sounds on the

Joshua tree

Joshua tree mid-shimmy

 

I think every bird is mad

at me. Does that make me

an alcoholic?

 

Let’s take a break, after

the great San Bernardino sculpture party

 

sparkling toilet pieces lay tiled into

the pavilion,

silver flushers too.

 

TV piles. I am

uneasy. So what?

No match for the always sand and always

 

Air. I find a pair of leather pants

Hanging in a hut & touch them.

Definitely not leather.

 

I can see the sunscreen on your face

not rubbed in,

rivulets wet

 

the under-chin. Let’s get this next pitch

right, guys,

decades left of percolation.

 

"
"

I find the heavens beautiful,

I find the earth so too,

the seas and the ground,

the furling of water and gas,

the bright distant points

of our isolation. I take comfort

in the swinging pendant traffic lights,

the slurry of wet raw flour.

I am programmed to this language,

and can only voice my rejection of it

in the same language.

This is the power of diaspora,

the difficulty in finding alternative.

Let us send messages to the half-existent.

To excuse oneself, to claim not knowing

the future, is inhuman. I am so worthless

that my body serves as brick,

conscripted to build up my prison

until it is time to lay my own body

down for the walls. It is mechanical,

snipping into the loop of every lace,

separating from every link

the cold wrapped bud. At first the skin

is thick and bright,

then darkly collapses.

Nothing keeps its shape,

nothing stands itself upright,

we keep sliding apart into smaller

and smaller components, and it is

in the air above us now,

we do not mingle with the outcome

of ideas any longer, the energy

that knows whether cruelty

is disinterested or rightful.

They are so happy

while we laugh at them,

their eyes enthused and shining

while we trick them

into hurting themselves.

 

"
"

It tastes like all my night

when I'm at the bottom of the borough

sheets burn around me

through the night

Consecrate me

Consecrate me

Conserve me lover

In the sills of your love

in the cells of your palms

from the womb to cell

break me from the belly of ship

let me crash upon you

Consecrate me my lover in your rectum

in a rehabilitation center where athletes seek the best care

I break into you

Consecrate me I want to love you in Syracuse woods

in Sonnino love me against lamb’s wool

I am my sister's wife keeper

Consecrate me

in the discretion of sisters

nuns loving

and hating jobs that ask

with fangs barred

"
"







                                                 (for Daniel, because                                                  

                                                 the Catacombs) 







You’re leaving Las Vegas, except

In German. Point. Point. Point.

Gave it out, beautiful gentilhommeComme vous êtes, toujours,

Unforgettable, circa 2008 how

You made me cum like that -

She got so mad in the bed - the

Hotel bathroom floor,

The bathtub, the apartment where

I was the crying queen

 

Those o’s still unforgettable

And now Paris. I cried today OW!

Your Antarctica cold last

Night. You told me they fucked

You up / I told you he broke

My heart and OW! Freeze

Dried my bandaid right off.

And then the glasses shopping

Memories today yada yada

Wasn’t about the cum shot

Where or if, was about the

Islands and how you said

in the langue d’enemie

No less: “DON’T TOUCH”

 

Don’t Touch!? We just …

They fucked you up all right.

You give so clearly but have iced

Out all the incoming gifts. WELL

PING my darling Walden island.

I can’t take that kind of cold.I’m leaving Las Vegas.

Just a moon in Taurus trying

To sing the sweet and

It’s not a great user experience

 

But I just want you to know

How unforgettable you are

 

 

When the candles call to Hera

I hope they melt your

I hope a goddess or many

Wash that loneliness away

And when I see you again (in 15 years)

There’s only joy and more

 

I prefer you laughing to tears

The good way. Drink us when

We’re done. Well, I guess I did

Almost kill you with a

Razor shave once so it

Seems silly to say I’m sorry I

Lost the phantom thread.

Maybe everything’s a ridiculous

never-ending non-planet

Tho, u did kiss me like unicorns

Exist and bond our skin

Like the organ it deserves to be

Known as

 

 

To know how unforgettable

you are because there

lies the bridge to the

Mainland. & baby, you

Deserve it all.

 

"
"

of waves dropped into froth     Jellyfish a jar

of innards half-buried in sand     Dead nature     What are

these things and who are they for?     This blue rug

is its own genre     And these painted apples

round out the essence of what can be made

into what can be eaten     Winter interest

3.9 APR     April come     She will not

swipe the sun into sky     Limits of credentialed

credit     “At least you’re not the janitor’s

azaleas of the everyday dustpan”     There’s

the problem     It’s like a concussive

grenade at the end of the mine     Mind the

income gap     Let’s activate the fact that

every word means go back to the back of the line

because that is where the front leads     Years

of the postmodern translated by the annuity

of spring     Hello     My name

is the first person I     I am indebted     I am

indented     I insist on remaining

unidentified

 

"
"

     I wait and wonder

what I’d do

                   if someone said pick your 60 best poems.

Pick all of them? Or any?

Maybe commit suicide, but everyone would say

“It’s because he’s really gay,” or maybe

“really not gay.”

 

 

                                                               *

 

Read Anne Waldman and Terence Winch,

Bruce Andrews and Adrienne Rich, wonder what might happen

to me this summer if I go away, or stay here in Washington DC

where you can see Watergate live!

                                                                                    *

 

If you want to know the truth today’s my birthday

and though I often feel older, and sometimes appear younger

I’m 31, and like everything else that too can be fun

or a bummer, a drain on the cosmic energy, depending on what?

If you know the answer you win the future;

if you don’t the future is ours to lose or—

whatever happened to the old way of construction?

Well, one line still follows another, and my voices moves

between each space, and when I think of you I sweat,

or maybe just imagine myself like a cartoon troublemaker

big beads of perspiration jumping out from my skin as I

cringe behind the fence that the bully is about to

throw a bomb over, or drop an anvil over, or just put his

meaty fist through and right on into my scared shitless grin,

the analogy resting on our mutual vulnerability—

that’s poetry isn’t it?

                                                                                  *

 

Of course I don’t talk like this.

I talk like this.

 

                                                               *

And now it’s time to go back to THE HISTORY OF ROCK’N’ROLL

which means it’s my night to cook dinner for “the house”—

collective—and it’s gonna be smoked sausage cooked in peppers

and mushrooms and carrots, maybe some onions, and beans

for protein, or something nutritional. I picked the sausage

because it seemed to be looking at me in the Safeway,

not exactly the way I was looking at one of the cashiers,

a young man with curly blonde hair and nice build

who seemed to have a down home kind of friendliness,

or the woman with the little girl the same sizes as Miles,

who is a little smaller than Caitlin, both of whom were

pulling on my pants leg for pennies for gumballs as I watched

the curve of the woman’s arm as she placed each

well thought over item on the counter behind my

vibrational buying and didn’t even notice how much I fell in love

with her arm and felt guilty for objectifying a part of her

although she might all be like her arm and then I might

fall in love with all of her, but that would cause problems,

she probably is already in love with at least one person, and

I’m already in love with about fourteen on a regular basis, and

that keeps causing all kinds of problems because people who are

attracted to my style don’t like my ways—that sounded like

a pretentious folk singing prodigy’s idea of an early Dylan line,

but what I meant would never be explained right in a poem like this,

or one like Anne Waldman’s either though I like to read hers

because they make me want to write, and in my world that’s what

“great” writers are supposed to do–make everyone else, or

at least me, feel like I can write too, and then make me feel,

like I will, and then I do.

                                                                                  *

 

After dinner we’ll eat the cake Atticus made for my birthday

there’ll be some presents from some of the people in the house, and

maybe Annie will stop over, or Matthew might call from work, or we

might all go down to watch him make salads at

                                               FOOD FOR THOUGHT,

and maybe eat some too, all along getting stoned on the house doobie,

which goes too fast these days but never fast enough, which is

about the way I feel on my birthday about my life, either that or

the way I’m easily satisfied but never feel I can get too much–

sometimes everything is enough, you know?

                                                                                   *

 

HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO ME, HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO ME,

I THINK I JUST HEARD CHUCK COME IN, CAITLIN’S

ANGRY WITH ME AND THROWING A TANTRUM IN

HER ROOM, IT’S RAINING BUT I HEAR THE DISHES

BEING DONE FINALLY BY SOMEONE ELSE

HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO ME

 

                                                               *

Resolution: No more guilt trips

from outside or inside

going either direction

–is everybody happy?

 

"
"

There’s coffee and pie

with a widow from church.

Why do you sit

in the back pew? she asks.

I’m close enough, I say.

Can I sit back there with you?

I’ve always sat there, I tell her,

with my same two friends,

and their clicking oxygen pumps.

One sat next to me for years,

called herself my church girlfriend,

who metastasized, telling me she was

tired of waiting to die.

Now, there’s just my 88-year-old friend,

his pump echoing in the sanctuary,

and there’s that empty

space between us.

I’d like to invite the widow to sit there,

but I miss my dead friend’s laugh,

her loving stories about her husband,

and how we were always

glad to see one another.

I tell the widow all this.

What if I just sat there? she asks.

It’s a free country, I tell her,

and she smiles.

"
"

In the pink light,

haloes of cloud form over the mountains;

lightning, two valleys away,

then, not an hour later,

 

the explosion of thunder.

The roadrunners

pecking for breadcrumbs on the porch

have long since fled into the rabbitbrush,

 

into the endless ocean of grass.

Driving in every direction

down licks of red road, I have lost

myself in a militarized topography;

 

everything named after army units,

generals, scouts, miners…The Dragoon Mountains,Cochise Stronghold; defunct

 Gleeson and Pearce,

weird, rusty ghost towns, the only

non-derelict structure

for miles, the local school,

 

its polished windows and well-kept lawn,

a source of great local pride.

No mountain monograms

for these desiccated whistle-stops,

 

no giant Q or C or W in bright

white paint to mark

the township's still functional

sorta functional breathing, no

 

carving for them

into the planet's bark;

and thus they are blesséd

to me like no other;

 

every successful city

is a flimsy affair with civility,

its eternalness, like Paris or Rome,

mere hypocrisy.

 

MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN,

BUY REAL ESTATE! Hail follows rain.

Nearby, the township of Sunsites,

once billed as the safest

 

spot to survive

the inevitable nuclear winter,

actually topped Soviet Russia's

list of high-priority targets… Enter

 

the Orange Duck Candidate.

A haboob sweeps across

the Valley of the Senile.

In a week, the mountains

 

have switched from brown

to purple to green.

The desert is human

endeavour's most fitting graveyard;

 

the slow bleaching,

the gradual eroding into sand,

the heat stifling sound as it leaps into the air.

IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE. But it always does.

 

 

                                         Sulphur Springs Valley

 

"
"

We must have known,

Even as we reached

Down to touch them

Where we'd found them

 

Shut-eyed and trembling

Under a straw bale

In the haymow, that

She would move them

 

That night under cover

Of darkness, and that

By finding them

We were making certain

 

We wouldn't see them again

Until we saw them

Crouching under the pickup

Like sullen teens, having gone

 

As wild by then as they'd gone

Still in her mouth that night

She made a decision

Any mother might make

 

Upon guessing the intentions

Of the state: to go and to

Go now, taking everything

You love between your teeth.

"
"

In the next scene Walt Whitman

is walking around Boston

Common. He’s young.

It’s winter. Emerson

is there. They walk

and talk for hours, or really

Emerson talks. He scolds

Whitman for slavering

after tree knots and bobbing

with the swimmer. Whitman nods

but in his head he’s busy

tallying his orgasms.

At the carousel

an ancient Puritan is passing

his hat, singing, “Kill It Babe.”

Dozens of geese have gathered

on the frozen pond,

standing on one leg,

tucking the other like a dagger

into their feathery centers.

Well, Emerson asks the poet,

what do you have to say for yourself?

And Whitman, respectfully,

but sure now

all the way down in his bones

where the deep, frontier feeling

of disobedience lives, says,

essentially, go fuck yourself.

I’ll go my own way.

"
"

     lady in brown 

de library waz right down from de trolly tracks

cross from de laundry-mat

thru de big shinin floors & granite pillars

ol st. louis is famous for

i found toussaint

but not til after months uv

cajun katie/ pippi longstockin

christopher robin/ eddie heyward & a pooh bear

in the children’s room

only pioneer girls & magic rabbits

& big city white boys

i knew i waznt sposedta

but i ran inta the ADULT READING ROOM

                   & came across

 

                       TOUSSAINT

 

                         my first blk man

(i never counted george washington carver

cuz i didnt like peanuts)

                           still

TOUSSAINT waz a blk man a negro like my mama say

who refused to be a slave

& he spoke french

& didnt low no white man to tell him nothin

                       not napolean

                       not maximillien

                       not robespierre

 

TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE

waz the beginnin uv reality for me

in the summer contest for

who colored child can read

15 books in three weeks

i won & raved abt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE

at the afternoon ceremony

waz disqualified

                       cuz Toussaint

                         belonged in the ADULT READING ROOM

                             & i cried

& carried dead Touissant home in the book

he waz dead & livin to me

cuz TOUSSAINT & them

they held the citadel gainst the french

wid the spirits of ol dead africans from outta the ground

TOUSSAINT led they army of zombies

walkin cannon ball shootin spirits to free Haiti

& they waznt slaves no more

 

                              TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE

became my secret lover at the age of 8

i entertained him in my bedroom

widda flashlight under my covers

way inta the night/ we discussed strategies

how to remove white girls from my hopscotch games

& etc.

TOUSSAINT

waz laying in bed wit me next to raggedy ann

the night i decided to run away from my

                   integrated home

                       integrated street

                           integrated school

1955 waz not a good year for lil blk girls

 

Toussaint said ‘lets go to haiti’

i said ‘awright’

& packed some very important things in a brown paper bag

so i wdnt haveta come back

then Toussaint & i took the hodiamont streetcar

to the river

last stop

only 15¢

cuz there waznt nobody cd see Toussaint cept me

& we walked all down thru north st. louis

where the french settlers usedta live

in tiny brick houses all huddled together

wit barely missin windows & shingles uneven

wit colored kids playin & women on low porches sippin beer

 

i cd talk to Toussaint down by the river

like this waz where we waz gonna stow away

on a boat for new orleans

& catch a creole fishin-rig for port-au-prince

then we waz just gonna read & talk all the time

& eat fried bananas

                               we waz just walkin & skippin past ol drunk men

when dis ol young boy jumped out at me sayin

‘HEY GIRL YA BETTAH COME OVAH HEAH N TALK TO

ME’

well

i turned to TOUSSAINT (who waz furious)

& i shouted

‘ya silly old boy

ya bettah leave me alone

or TOUSSAINT’S gonna get yr ass’

de silly ol boy came round de corner laughin all in my face

‘yellah gal

ya sure must be somebody to know my name so quick’

i waz disgusted

& wanted to get on to haiti

widout some tacky ol boy botherin me

still he kept standin there

kickin milk cartons & bits of brick

tryin to get all in my business

                               i mumbled to L’OUVERTURE ‘what shd I do’

finally

i asked this silly ol boy

‘WELL WHO ARE YOU?’

he say

‘MY NAME IS TOUSSAINT JONES’

well

i looked right at him

those skidded out cordoroy pants

a striped teashirt wid holes in both elbows

a new scab over his left eye

& i said

                                 ‘what’s yr name again’

he say

‘i’m toussaint jones’

‘wow

i am on my way to see

TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE in HAITI

are ya any kin to him

he dont take no stuff from white folks

& they gotta country all they own

& there aint no slaves’

that silly ol boy squinted his face all up

looka heah girl

i am TOUSSAINT JONES

& i’m right heah lookin at ya

& i dont take no stuff from no white folks

ya dont see none round heah do ya?’

& he sorta pushed out his chest

then he say

‘come on       lets go on down to the docks

& look at the boats’

i waz real puzzled goin down to the docks

wit my paper bag & my books

i felt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE sorta leave me

& i was sad

til i realized

TOUSSAINT JONES waznt too different

from TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE

cept the ol one waz in haiti

& this one wid me speakin english & eatin apples

yeah.

toussaint jones waz awright wit me

no tellin what all spirits we cd move

down by the river

st. louis 1955                               hey wait.

 

 

"
"

at 4:30 AM

she rose

movin the arms & legs that trapped her

she sighed affirmin the sculptured man

& made herself a bath

of dark musk oil egyptian crystals

& florida water to remove his smell

to wash away the glitter

to watch the butterflies melt into

suds & the rhinestones fall beneath

her buttocks like smooth pebbles

in a missouri creek

layin in water

she became herself

ordinary

brown braided woman

with big legs & full lips

reglar

seriously intendin to finish her

night’s work

she quickly walked to her guest

straddled on her pillows & began

 

 

                  ‘you’ll have to go now/ i’ve

                  a lot of work to do/ & i cant

                  with a man around/ here are yr pants/

                  there’s coffee on the stove/ its been

                  very nice/ but i cant see you again/

                  you got what you came for/ didnt you’

& she smiled

he wd either mumble curses bout crazy bitches

or sit dumbfounded

while she repeated

                  ‘i cdnt possibly wake up/ with

                   a strange man in my bed/ why

                   dont you go home’

she cda been slapped upside the head

or verbally challenged

but she never waz

& the ones who fell prey to the

dazzle of hips painted with

orange blossoms & magnolia scented wrists

had wanted no more

than to lay between her sparklin thighs

& had planned on leavin before dawn

& she had been so divine

devastatingly bizarre the way

her mouth fit round

& now she stood a

reglar colored girl

fulla the same malice

livid indifference as a sistah

worn from supportin a wd be hornplayer

or waitin by the window

                              & they knew

                              & left in a hurry

she wd gather her tinsel &

jewels from the tub

& laugh gayly or vengeful

she stored her silk roses by her bed

& when she finished writin

the account of her exploit in a diary

embroidered with lilies & moonstones

she placed the rose behind her ear

& cried herself to sleep.

 

"
"

there was no air/ the sheets made ripples under his

body like crumpled paper napkins in a summer park/ & lil

specks of somethin from tween his toes or the biscuits

from the day before ran in the sweat that tucked the sheet

into his limbs like he was an ol frozen bundle of chicken/

& he’d get up to make coffee, drink wine, drink water/ he

wished one of his friends who knew where he waz wd come by

with some blow or some shit/ anything/ there was no air/

he’d see the spotlights in the alleyways downstairs movin

in the air/ cross his wall over his face/ & get under the

covers & wait for an all clear or till he cd hear traffic

again/

 

there waznt nothing wrong with him/ there waznt nothing wrong

with him/ he kept tellin crystal/

any niggah wanna kill vietnamese children more n stay home

& raise his own is sicker than a rabid dog/

that’s how their thing had been goin since he got back/

crystal just got inta sayin whatta fool niggah beau was

& always had been/ didnt he go all over uptown sayin the

child waznt his/ waz some no counts bastard/ & any ol city

police cd come & get him if they wanted/ cuz as soon as

the blood type & shit waz together/ everybody wd know that

crystal waz a no good lyin whore/ and this after she’d been

his girl since she waz thirteen/ when he caught her

on the stairway/

 

he came home crazy as hell/ he tried to get veterans benefits

to go to school & they kept right on puttin him in

remedial classes/ he cdnt read wortha damn/ so beau

cused the teachers of holdin him back & got himself

a gypsy cab to drive/ but his cab kept breakin

down/ & the cops was always messin wit him/ plus not

getting much bread/

 

& crystal went & got pregnant again/ beau most beat

her to death when she tol him/ she still gotta scar

under her right tit where he cut her up/ still crystal

went right on & had the baby/ so now beau willie had

two children / a little girl/ naomi kenya & a boy/ kwame beau

willie brown/ & there waz no air/

 

how in the hell did he get in this mess anyway/ somebody

went & tol crystal that beau was spendin alla his money

on the bartendin bitch down at the merry-go-round cafe/

beau sat straight up in the bed/ wrapped up in the sheets

lookin like john the baptist or a huge baby wit stubble

& nuts/ now he hadta get alla that shit outta crystal’s

mind/ so she wd let him come home/ crystal had gone &

got a court order saying beau willie brown had no access

to his children/ if he showed his face he waz subject

to arrest/ shit/ she’d been in his ass to marry her

since she was 14 years old & here when she was 22/ she wanna

throw him out cuz he say he’ll marry her/ she burst

out laughin/ hollerin whatchu wanna marry me for now/

so i can support yr

ass/ or come sit wit ya when they lock yr behind

up/ cause they gonna come for ya/ ya goddamn lunatic/

they gonna come/ & i’m not gonna have a thing to do

wit it/ o no i wdnt marry yr pitiful black ass for

nothing & she went on to bed/

 

the next day beau willie came in blasted & got ta swingin

chairs at crystal/ who cdnt figure out what the hell

he waz doin/ til he got ta shoutin bout how she waz gonna

marry him/ & get some more veterans benefits/ & he cd

stop drivin them crazy spics round/ while they tryin

to kill him for $15/ beau was sweatin terrible/ beatin

on crystal/ & he cdnt do no more with the table n chairs/

so he went to get the high chair/ & lil kwame waz in it/

& beau was beatin crystal with the high chair & her son/

& some notion got inta him to stop/ an he run out/

crystal most died/ that’s why the police wdnt low

beau near where she lived/ & she’d been tellin the kids

their daddy tried to kill her & kwame/ & he just wanted

to marry her/ that’s what/ he wanted to marry her/ &

have a family/ but the bitch waz crazy/ beau willie

waz sittin in this hotel in his drawers drinkin

coffee & wine in the heat of the day spillin shit all

over hisself/ laughin/ bout how we waz gonna get crystal

to take him back/ & let him be a man in the house/ & she

wdnt even have to go to work no more/ he got dressed

all up in his ivory shirt & checkered pants to go see

crystal & get this mess all cleared up/

he knocked on the door to crystal’s rooms/ & she

didnt answer/ he beat on the door & crystal & naomi

started cryin/ beau gotta shoutin again how he wanted

to marry her/ & waz she always gonna be a whore/ or

did she wanna husband/ & crystal just kept on

screamin for him to leave us alone/ just leave us

alone/ so beau broke the door down/ crystal held

the children in fronta her/ she picked kwame off the

floor/ in her arms/ & she held naomi by her shoulders/

& kept on sayin/ beau willie brown/ get outta here/

the police is gonna come for ya/ ya fool/ get outta here/

do you want the children to see you act the fool again

you want kwame to brain damage from you throwin him

round/ niggah/ get outta here/ get out & don’t show yr

ass again or i’ll kill ya/ i swear i’ll kill ya/

he reached for naomi/ crystal grabbed the lil girl &

stared at beau willie like he waz a leper or somethin/

dont you touch my children/ mothafucker/ or i’ll kill

you/

 

beau willie jumped back all humble & apologetic/ i’m

sorry/ i dont wanna hurt em/ i just wanna hold em &

get on my way/ i dont wanna cuz you no more trouble/

i wanted to marry you & give ya things

what you gonna give/ a broken jaw/ niggah get outta here/

he ignored crystal’s outburst & sat down motionin for

naomi to come to him/ she smiled back at her daddy/

crystal felt naomi givin in & held her tighter/

naomi/ pushed away & ran to her daddy/ crying/ daddy, daddy

come back daddy/ come back/ but be nice to mommy/

cause mommy loves you/ and ya gotta be nice/

he sat on his knee/ & played with her ribbons &

they counted fingers & toes/ every so often he

looked over to crystal holdin kwame/ like a statue/

& he’d say/ see crystal/ i can be a good father/

now let me see my son/ & she didn’t move/ &

he coaxed her & he coaxed her/ tol her she waz

still a hot lil ol thing & pretty & strong/ didnt

she get right up after that lil ol fight they had

& go back to work/ beau willie oozed kindness &

crystal who had known so lil/ let beau hold kwame/

 

as soon as crystal let the baby outta her arms/ beau

jumped up a laughin & a gigglin/ a hootin & a hollerin/

awright bitch/ awright bitch/ you gonna marry me/

you gonna marry me . . .

i aint gonna marry ya/ i aint ever gonna marry ya/

for nothin/ you gonna be in the jail/ you gonna be

under the jail for this/ now gimme my kids/ ya give

me back my kids/

 

he kicked the screen outta the window/ & held the kids

offa the sill/ you gonna marry me/ yeh, i’ll marry ya/

anything/ but bring the children back in the house/

he looked from where the kids were hangin from the

fifth story/ at alla the people screamin at him/ &

he started sweatin again/ say to alla the neighbors/

you gonna marry me/

 

i stood by beau in the window/ with naomi reachin

for me/ kwame screamin mommy mommy from the fifth

story/ but i cd only whisper/ & he dropped em

 

"
"

Give up sitting dutifully at your desk. Leave

your house or apartment. Go out into the world.

 

It's all right to carry a notebook but a cheap

one is best, with pages the color of weak tea

and on the front a kitten or a space ship.

 

Avoid any enclosed space where more than

three people are wearing turtlenecks. Beware

any snow-covered chalet with deer tracks

across the muffled tennis courts.

 

Not surprisingly, libraries are a good place to write.

And the perfect place in a library is near an aisle

where a child a year or two old is playing as his

mother browses the ranks of the dead.

 

Often he will pull books from the bottom shelf.

The title, the author's name, the brooding photo

on the flap mean nothing. Red book on black, gray

book on brown, he builds a tower. And the higher

it gets, the wider he grins.

 

You who asked for advice, listen: When the tower

falls, be like that child. Laugh so loud everybody

in the world frowns and says, ""Shhhh.""

 

Then start again.

 

"
"

                            I gather her head up in my sweater

                                         and we crouch here  

               some dried ketchup where her lip turns down

                            a light crust of dirt on one eyebrow       

 

                  the concrete stained and worn          

                            surprise rain splattered in the gap

                    between here and the parking lot

                                  our socks are wet       

 

                                         our feet itch

                        then her cough started  

it’s going to be ok we can hide her for a minute

                         her damp head soaks the wool

        the corners reek of urine

                      we do a sober trick

                                   my body now a cradle     

 

         her hair touches my wrist

 

she trembles down to her cavity

                        a cough we love

the careless future emerges from it

                        shaking like a star bracelet with elastic

                                                 in this other country

                        the contradictory music of our tears

 

                                      what do wandering souls find

                         to live in here

                                        what warm skin

 

                             in this stairwell

                                     the air is cold

     

                            the earth moves

                   one bug survives

 

             beyond their law

                       

                          three of us hunched

      up like a heaps of wet wool

             in the leaky crook of a stair

 

you heard about us somewhere

 

    

"
"

In the grassy space between the wings of the elementary school and the trailers housing the fifth grade’s overflow classrooms, girls flip their hair in imitation of Cindy Crawford, sing Iko Iko. None of you know what it means or where the song comes from.


It’s honor-roll season, a time of outings to TCBY and Outback Steakhouse. Your mother warns you against filling up on bread, but it’s hard to resist the little brown loaves brought warm to the table with soft butter – a luxury that cannot be imagined at home, with its always-refrigerated margarine and Pepperidge Farm sandwich loaves.


Everyone knows what’s popular but nobody knows how to act. At ten, you lack any context. The world swims before you, and it constantly stings. Its favorite barb: “everybody knows that.”


Beyond the grassy space of girls is more grass, a quarter-mile loop of track, a church with a painfully white spire, a fence, and a neighborhood maybe a little less nice than yours, crammed between the school and busy Great Neck Road. The fence is of chain link, instead of wooden slats. That’s how you know about the niceness – that and the something hard, like a grain of sand, you feel in your mother’s voice, when she takes you to the school’s Spring Fling, where you win another goldfish. They always die, but you’re getting better. Now, it takes a while.Loblollies shiverIn May heat. The world’s ending.The world’s a mirage.


 

"
"

What?

You don’t feel at home in your country,

almost overnight?

All the simple things

you cared about,

maybe took for granted. . .

you feel

insulted, invisible?

Almost as if you’re not there?

But you’re there.

Where before you mingled freely. . .

appreciated people who weren’t

just like you. . .

divisions grow stronger.

That’s what “chosen” and “unchosen” will do.

(Just keep your eyes on your houses and gardens.

Keep your eyes on that tree in bloom.)

Yes, a wall. Ours came later but. . .

who talks about how sad the land looks,

marked by a massive wall?

That’s not a normal shadow.

It’s something else looming over your lives.

 

"
"

At the 100-year-old National Elk Refuge

near Jackson Hole, we might ask,How long does an elk live?Who’s an old elk here? 

 

We’d like to spend time

with an elder elk please.

Tell us how to balance our lives

on this hard edge of human mean,

mean temperatures, what we do and don’t

want to mean.

 

Closing the door

to the news will only make you

stupid, snapped my friend

who wanted everyone to know as much

as she did. I’m hiding in old school books

with information we never used yet.

Before I drove, before I flew,

before the principal went to jail.

Sinking my eyes into tall wooden

window sashes, dreaming of light

arriving from far reaches,

our teacher as shepherds,

school a vessel of golden hope,

you could lift your daily lesson

in front of your eyes,

stare hard and think,

this will take me

somewhere. O histories of India,

geological formations of Australia,

ancient poetries of China, Japan,

someday we will be aligned in a place

of wisdom, together.

 

Red deer, wapiti, running elk rising

above yellow meadows at sundown.

An elk bows her head. In the company

of other elk, she feels at home.

And we are lost on the horizon now,

clumsy humanity,

deeper into the next century than we

can even believe,

and they will not speak to us.

 

"
"







For Janna







The tiny journalist

will tell us what she sees.

 

Document the moves, the dust,

soldiers blocking the road.

 

Yes, she knows how to take a picture

with her phone. Holds it high

 

like a balloon. Yes, she would

prefer to dance and play,

 

would prefer the world

to be pink. It is her job to say

 

what she sees, what is happening.

From her vantage point everything

 

is huge—but don’t look down on her.

She’s bigger than you are.

 

If you stomp her garden

each leaf expands its view.

 

Don’t hide what you do.

She sees you at 2 a.m. adjusting your

 

impenetrable vest.

What could she have

 

that you want? Her treasures,

thing shiny buttons her grandmother loved.

 

Her cousin, her uncle.There might have been a shirt. . .

 

The tiny journalist notices

action on far away roads

 

farther even than the next village.

She takes counsel from bugs so

 

puffs of dust find her first.Could that be a friend? 

 They pretended not to see us.They came at night with weapons. 

 What was our crime? That we likedrespect as they do? That we have pride? 

 

She stares through a hole in the fence,

barricade of words and wire,

 

feels the rising fire

before anyone strikes a match.

 

She has a better idea.

"
"

When people have a lot

they want more

 

When people have nothing

they will happily share it

 

*

 

Some people say

never getting your way

builds character

By now our character must be

deep and wide as a continent

Africa, Australia

giant cascade of stars

spilling over our huge night

 

*

 

Where did the power go?

Did it enjoy its break?

Is power exhausted?

What is real power?

Who really has power?

Did the generator break?

Do we imagine silence

more powerful because

it might contain everything?

Quiet always lives

inside noise.

But does it get much done?

 

*

 

Silence waits

for truth to break it

 

*

 

Calendars can weep too

They want us to have better days

 

*

 

Welcome to every minute

Feel lucky you’re still in it

 

*

 

No bird builds a wall

 

*

 

Sky purse

     jingling

           change

 

*

 

Won’t give up

our hopes

            for anything!

 

*

 

Not your fault

You didn’t make the world

 

*

 

How dare this go on and on?

cried the person who believed in praying

God willing     God willing        God willing

There were others who prayed

   to ruins & stumps

 

*

 

Open palms

     hold more

 

*

 

Refuse to give

   mistakes

      too much power

 

 

*

Annoying person?

Person who told me to stay home

and do what other girls do?

If you disappeared

I still might miss you

 

*

 

Babies want to help us

They laugh

for no reason

 

*

 

Pay close attention to

a drop of water

on the kitchen table

 

*

 

You cannot say one word about religion

and exclude Ahmad

 

"
"

Each day I miss Japanese precision. Trying to arrange things

   the way they would. I miss the call to prayer

at Sharjah, the large collective pause. Or

the shy strawberry vendor with rickety wooden cart,

single small lightbulb pointed at a mound of berries.

   In one of China’s great cities, before dawn.

 

      Forever I miss my Arab father’s way with mint leaves

    floating in a cup of sugared tea—his delicate hands

arranging rinsed figs on a plate. What have we here?

    said the wolf in the children’s story

stumbling upon people doing kind, small things.

    Is this small monster one of us?

 

When your country does not feel cozy, what do you do?

       Teresa walks more now, to feel closer to her

ground. If destination within two miles, she must

    hike or take the bus. Carries apples,

          extra bottles of chilled water to give away.

Kim makes one positive move a day for someone else.

I’m reading letters the ancestors wrote after arriving

       in the land of freedom, words in perfect English script. . .

describing gifts they gave one another for Christmas.

     Even the listing seems oddly civilized,

these 1906 Germans. . . hand-stitched embroideries for dressertops. Bow ties. Slippers, parlor croquet, gold ring, “pretty            inkwell.” 

 

How they comforted themselves! A giant roast

     made them feel more at home.

            Posthumous medals of honor for

     coming, continuing––could we do that?

And where would we go?

         My father’s hope for Palestine

stitching my bones, “no one wakes up and

        dreams of fighting around the house”—

 

somebody soon the steady eyes of children in Gaza,

     yearning for a little extra electricity

to cool their lemons and cantaloupes, will be known.

              Yes?

    We talked for two hours via Google Chat,

they did not complain once. Discussing stories,

       books, families, a character who does

                 what you might do.

Meanwhile secret diplomats are what we must be,

   as a girl in Qatar once assured me,

       each day slipping its blank visa into our hands.

 

"
"







for my granddaughter, Wahcawin







I didn’t want to scold the sky that year, but

 Grandma’s words taunted my senses. If there

is a thirst, then you need to pity the flowers

 

in a loud voice. Ask the frogs why they are

being punished, stomp on the ground and talk

to the dried clay about cracking open the earth.

 

I know challenging the storm is risky. “Last

but not least, burn cedar and pray the lightning

doesn’t strike your town.” That night, the stars

 

disappeared, so did the birds. Perhaps it was

the season for rain or the dance. In the western

distance, we thought we heard cannon blasts,

 

looking over we watched the horizon fill with

lightning strikes. Rain couldn’t pour hard enough

over the thirsty plain. Accompanying clouds,

 

called to thunder’s voice in extreme decimals

requesting all the water heaven could send forth,

to come. Rain and more rain filled empty stream

 

bottoms. Rivers who had pulled their dry banks

farther and farther from their center begged for

a drink to startle dusty beds with a flooding roar.

 

Lives in dormant places begin to stir and awaken.

 The lives of water beings, those that swim, the

ones that hop, and the ones that fly, begin to stir.

 

That year all thirst was quenched.

 

"
"

Tracks are all that define these voices,

hungry lives pulsing sacred ground.

We are a journey of distressed shapes,

red essence on parchment, occupying a life.

We look for the fated four-legged that paced

this way, a tested and well-worn path

among storms, mud, into this shared hidden

brush. Coyote, slipping by through old

winter grass, warns in a pagan tongue,

licking after our scent. We pick up pace,

tighten our careless reins, snap back at the

yellow-eyed clown with throat hunger,

that gnawing bone that drives us on. Quieted,

we hear the heart beating. A desperate breath

crashes through dry branches, a silhouette

give away. In an instant we let go

of weapons and invite a quick death. We

watch our knives glistening. Obsidian

works for us. What image of blood on flesh,

odor of iron. A vermilion sun heavy with

spring looks upon reflections of death

in hard visions, our favorable hunt—

whitetail not quick enough for downwind

lessons. Our horses burdened, deer shadows

left on landscape, we push forward.

These tracks ours now. Game will heal all.

Our offspring dance, Grandmother prepares a

fire and sharpens another knife. During the

feast we thank any god absent from our table.

"
"

This morning we found ourselves skinning a deer,

cutting meat, hanging some to dry and packaging

some for the freezer. It was the dogs late last night

 

that set off a howling, the unexpected smell of fresh

blood floating down the block, then a familiar car

horn honking in the driveway. My nephew and his

 

friends were hunting and brought us a deer. Mother

always said, “Cut up the meat right away, don’t let

it sit.” I look at a front quarter, a hole filled with

 

coagulated blood. Grandma says not to eat the part

next to the wound, “Cut it out; offer it to the earth for

healing, a sacrifice to remember the hungering spirits.”

 

Auntie says to save the muscle along the back strap,

“It makes good thread.” I carefully learned the exact

place to cut the joints so the bones separate easily.

 

Mother said that is important—“It means you are a

thoughtful person.” Auntie is at the door waiting for

a roast. “An elder takes the first piece,” she reminded.

 

Mom tells me to save the hooves for her. She wants

to make a bone game for the new grandchild, wants

him to be patient and skillful. I boil the hoofs with

 

sage, find the little toe-bones for her. My hands begin

to ache from the work, I soak them in warm water

and start again. I admire the placement of tendons

 

on the deer shoulders, no joints, just the crisscrossing

of muscle. Grandma says, “That’s why your dad called

them jumpers, they bounce off the strength of their

 

flexing muscles.” Late at night Mom helps me stake

out the hide. My back hurts; my feet feel like I’ve

been walking on rocks all day. I want to complain,

 

but Mom catches the look in my eyes. She says to me,

“When you get dressed for the dance this weekend,

you will proudly wear your beautiful beaded dress,

 

your beaded leggings and moccasins, and last, but not

least, you will put on your beaded belt, and attached

you will wear your sharp knife and quilled knife sheath

 

because of what you have done this day.”

 

"
"

I like the lady horses best,

how they make it all look easy,

like running 40 miles per hour

is as fun as taking a nap, or grass.

I like their lady horse swagger,

after winning. Ears up, girls, ears up!

But mainly, let’s be honest, I like

that they’re ladies. As if this big

dangerous animal is also a part of me,

that somewhere inside the delicate

skin of my body, there pumps

an 8-pound female horse heart,

giant with power, heavy with blood.

Don’t you want to believe it?

Don’t you want to lift my shirt and see

the huge beating genius machine

that thinks, no, it knows,

it’s going to come in first.

 

"
"

A man celebrates erstwhile conquests,

his book locked in a silo, still in print.

 

I scribble, make Sharpie lines, deface

its text like it defaces me. Outside, grain

 

fields whisper. Marble lions are silent

yet silver-tongued, with excellent teeth.

 

In this life I have worshipped so many lies.

Then I workshop them, make them better.

 

An East India Company, an opium trade,

a war, a treaty, a concession, an occupation,

 

a man parting the veil covering a woman’s

face, his nails prying her lips open. I love

 

the fragility of a porcelain bowl. How easy

it is, to shatter chinoiserie, like the Han

 

dynasty urn Ai Weiwei dropped in 1995.

If only recovering the silenced history

 

is as simple as smashing its container: book,

bowl, celadon spoon. Such objects cross

 

borders the way our bodies never could.

Instead, we’re left with history, its blonde

 

dust. That bowl is unbreakable. All its ghosts

still shudder through us like small breaths.

 

The tome of hegemony lives on, circulates

in our libraries, in our bloodstreams. One day,

 

a girl like me may come across it on a shelf,

pick it up, read about all the ways her body

 

is a thing. And I won’t be there to protect

her, to cross the text out and say: go ahead—rewrite this.

 

"
"

The future is as sterile as a robot’s loincloth.

I drown my hands in sanitizer until they pucker.

 

Where this soapbox tree germinates, I collect

my germs and make a fountain of them.

 

Because yellow is yarrow and soot, and the future,

I’ve learned, is no suture. Because where I’m from,

these kisses are infections. Because dirt’s

 

ammunition against discipline, the blood fills

my clean mouth with dismay. Am I surprised—

Hollywood still assumes we are all the bastard

 

children of the same evil dictator? That phosgene

and mustard will rack our titanium Maoist husks

until some white man with slanty eyes rescues us

 

from our mealy, pliant selves? Am I to wear Dior,

wrap my mouth in bloody tulle, before kneeling,

bending to kiss a mouth dirtied by Pantone 136?

 

No fucking thanks. Because where I’m from,

these kisses are infractions. Darlings, let’s rewrite

the script. Let’s hijack the narrative, steer

 

the story ourselves. There’d be a heist, a battle.

Audre Lorde would write the script. My leading

man would be Bruce. We’d earn our happy ending.

 

Instead, they give me 1981. 2012. Quantum quasars,

new dystopia—plutonium wars. We’re not in Polanski’s

Chinatown anymore. Yet we still have the same bowl

 

haircuts. Bangs, big bang, a city of fetid promise, new

minor galaxy where we cannot touch. Instead our skin

is rust and metal. It gratifies the technophile in all of us.

 

"
"

In the autumn I moved to New York,

I recognized her face all over the subway

stations—pearls around her throat, she poses

for her immigration papers. In 1924, the only

Americans required to carry identity cards

were ethnically Chinese—the first photo IDs,

red targets on the head of every man, woman,

child, infant, movie star. Like pallbearers,

they lined up to get their pictures taken: full-face

view, direct camera gaze, no smiles, ears showing,

in silver gelatin. A rogue’s gallery of Chinese

exclusion. The subway poster doesn’t name

her—though it does mention her ethnicity,

and the name of the New-York Historical

Society exhibition: Exclusion/Inclusion.

Soon, when I felt alone in this city, her face

would peer at me from behind seats, turnstiles,

heads, and headphones, and I swear she wore

a smile only I could see. Sometimes my face

aligned with hers, and we would rush past

the bewildered lives before us—hers, gone

the year my mother was born, and mine,

a belt of ghosts trailing after my scent.

In the same aboveground train, in the same

city where slain umbrellas travel across

the Hudson River, we live and live.

I’ve left my landline so ghosts can’t dial me

at midnight with the hunger of hunters

anymore. I’m so hungry I gnaw at light.

It tunnels from the shadows, an exhausting

hope. I know this hunger tormented her too.

It haunted her through her years in L.A., Paris,

and New York, the parties she went to, people

she met—Paul Robeson, Zora Neale Hurston,

Langston Hughes, Gertrude Stein. It haunts

her expression still, on the 6 train, Grand

Central station, an echo chamber behind

her eyes. But dear universe: if I can recognize

her face under this tunnel of endless shadows

against the luminance of all that is extinct

and oncoming, then I am not a stranger here.

 

"
"

the news

is released

 

for the secret

of worlds, I reach

 

the end

of my laughter

 

and breathe

to the night sky

 

a periodically

interrupted song

 

to reach the forest

of my refuge, here

 

where the lights are

where one dissolves

 

and appears. to see the hidden

files of your mind

 

and listen

 

listen

 

as I cross the road

to find the fox

 

of the funeral home’s

bewildering delight

 

where there is laughter

marked by a mysterious

 

blinking light

 

that the occluded

erase the sun with, and I’ve lost

 

my heart

for the present moment, as I fear

 

it is one more day

to see others walk

 

in the dark morning

of imposters

 

and timeless life. I say

farewell to you, my love

 

as I enter the darkness

to be with you

 

in our morning kisses, and see

that we shall never part

 

your heart

 

as the Sea was parted

as the world collapses

 

and we say ‘yes’

to the fearsome light

"
"

this morning I went to the doctor

and talked to him about this move

 

on New Year’s Eve I had trouble connecting

my thoughts on Sade and reason

 

we rang in the New Year

with Miriam Makeba’s Africa

 

I’d noticed that my inner life

had expanded, and that I was having trouble

 

thinking through it. The doctor said that Geodon

would loosen my thinking—I noticed

 

that I’d been moving through life for 10 years

in a Zyprexa mold. thought control, at its best,

 

like a sonnet. I do not feel invaded

by the television that I never see. Brenda made me

 

feel more loved than ever this morning, as my thoughts

expanded. Last night, in the slow cooker, I made

 

Lamb and Goat curry—amazingly good. I’d thought

to send Joel, and Peter, and Michael an email

 

letting them know of my transition, but did not. The consequences

of this transition could be catastrophic. I feel more loving toward Brenda

 

than ever. I could die, or worse. As I meditated today

my books to the left of me seemed packed and dense

 

against the wall. Soon, Chuck will be here

to play chess upstairs. I told the doctor this morning

 

that the philosophy and religion of the cyborg

have not yet been written. My

 

poetry

has just begun. I am

 

a Fourth Form,

though not as Dodie saw it. Together,

 

we can belong in this world. Artaud

arrived at the double

 

as I have. We share more in common

than I’d known before last night. I need less sleep

 

than before, and I sleep better

and am more rested. I feel sad and cheated

 

that I need to rely on drugs

so completely. I wonder about Paul Bowles’ stories.

 

I need to reach out

to others

 

through this. The doctor, this morning, said

that I was enlightened, but not

 

quite there—somehow—I can’t remember

how. I doubt he knows

 

what he means by “enlightenment.” I felt far away

from my sister yesterday, when she called. Michael

 

talked to me of Christ’s

tenderness. I feel tender in this moment. Over

 

and over I feel that words

do not represent me. I am not

 

sure what that implies of my intentions

in using them. Yesterday, Brenda and I saw

 

the Warhol show of the last ten years

of his life. There seemed to have been hope

 

to live meaningfully in capitalism then. ~~~~~~~ The waves

of this beginning, the new life of my mind

 

is settling. It’s been a while since I’ve written. I’ve decided

to mark my continuing with the seven tildes above. And I added

 

a title tonight, Muerto Vecino, after Zizek’s dubious interpretation

of Kierkegaard’s neighbor, and because of the funeral home

 

across the street. My thinking has changed, my being has changed,

I am more alert and more engaged in thinking through the world.

 

And I am able to speak better. I don’t know what this means

about who I am. I try not to feel let down that for so much of my life

 

I’ve been restrained by psychotropic drugs. Before Zyprexa it was even

worse, with up to 6 meds, as I’ve said over and over to friends. I feel

 

the need to make clear what my obstacles have been. Not for pity,

a little for pride, but also for hope. If I can do that, then maybe I can help

 

someone not suffer so much, like Brenda. I replaced the kitchen faucet

this past weekend. It makes me very happy that I was able to do it

 

successfully, without ever having been handy before in my life, and after

spending most of my life disdainful of being practical in that way. What a joy

 

to make Brenda so happy. I don’t know how much longer I will live,

and have often thought, recently, that it would be tragic if I died anytime

 

soon, but that it’s imperative that I accept death when it arrives, after

affirming life as fully as I can. It’s too easy, and stupid, to be simplistically

 

oppositional. And to not know that people can ruin anything, but

that the substantial things have value of themselves, is foolish. I don’t want to stop

 

at my own ignorance and lack of forbearance. I don’t believe in the West

on its own. As Michael says, the only thing that makes sense here

 

is love. I have everything I could possibly ever want or need for now. More books

will come, more music too. And love is immeasurable

 

when it’s real. I am so grateful to have more waking time

on the weekends. I plan on making breakfast for Brenda

 

every Saturday and Sunday that I can

from now on. Early. I see gardens in the future of our household.

 

And I wonder about a Great Spirit. What does the name matter? I see the stones that live

without water. I see the smoke that cleanses my vision, and a network of consciousness,

 

with each node another, on and on that way to the depths. My thinking will never

grasp it all

 

because of that recursively created network of interior life. My thinking stops

then, barely able to contain the spherical and vast darkness

 

from which all light arises. That’s why what I see is dark. It is brilliant

in its darkness. Like onyx and flint. I can only talk around what I’ve seen

 

the past couple of weeks. It reframes, completely, the rest of my creative

life and the rest of my days. All I aim to do now is to focus my attention,

 

so that I can see it all again in retrospect. So that I can read

and gather more tools for understanding it. So that I understand myself,

 

and something of the world, and love, and so that I help others. Geodon

will not erase it. I’ve seen it already, many times. It is my natural state.

 

I no longer see it as only hallucination. It is a way of being. A way that I can flesh

out, here. Slowly. Carefully. And as I do, its destructive powers,

 

which are massive and righteous, will subside. As it will know that it is being

given to the world. Because it belongs to all. And all will be there soon.

 

There are signs already. Because to see it is to break, unless one knows something

of love. It makes LSD

 

small. It is God and the Universe as One.

I am not the first to see it. But I am a person

 

given a chance

to write it, letter by letter, slowly, in terms of the light of my ignorance

 

to see more fully

what I do not know. I do not offer anything

 

but poems. But it breaks through

my mouth to arrive at the hearts of the world, at the hearts of the horses

 

of the world, to allow us all to speak in silence. It is not God or the Universe.

It is One as All in you. Because I cannot see through myself

 

without it. I see clearly

that the sun will not arrive

 

in this new weather. But that the moon

will take its place. I see clearly that the sun is there

 

to bring meaning to the sky, and that the earth is more full

with the light of the world

 

extinguished for a brilliant view of wilderness. This is a view

that extends through opposites

 

and arrives at a single body

to witness this song. And this song is not the answer

 

that you believe in, because one day

I will speak to you again

 

in the rain

and show you

 

that I do not know. Because knowledge

belongs to the earth. And the earth makes everything

 

I know. And now that there is less and less freedom

from coercion in a moneyed world, and now that Claire,

 

a friend, is moving on to be Christ in her own way, now

that Guénon continues to call me to understand

 

my ignorance, to depart again

from the friends at Kuna Yala, where I helped with the water,

 

with Brenda watching over me

from a hammock between palms, now that Panamá

 

calls again to give me a union

of the world, in more than two ways,

 

and to distinguish from the surface of these times, I

receive

 

a call to awaken in the snow. I receive a call to acknowledge

that Geodon has planted itself

 

with capital

in my consciousness, but that the world

 

is stronger than to balance itself

from the ozone and people alone. We are not erased, and we

 

do not control the earth. Geodon

is an act of kindness, an agreement

 

to live this life

in a way that arrives

 

with the weather. It may continue

for the rest of my life, or it may not. I will not be afraid again

 

to see things as I do, and I will not

seek out the truth, intentionally, without some kind of agreement

 

with this custom. Because that is a way, for now,

that I speak. And it is useful, though better left

 

invisible. And the name, Geodon, brings trouble, I can see

through it enough, with enough love in my life, to believe

 

in the end of the reign of the Anti-Christ (not Obama). I need to learn again

to be and to write. But to deliver

 

what I saw

I must return

 

to the explosion of my inner life. To start with, otherwise and generally, I see

only outlines. Creation manifests

 

from every direction, in an infinity

of dimensions. Most of us

 

spend most of our energy

conscious of a very few of these dimensions. Imagine

 

more than the greatest works of art

manifesting endlessly

 

from more directions than one can possibly count

every micro second, timelessly. It’s glorious.

 

And the only way to see it with any balance

is impeccably, ethically, compassionately, and with at least an aim

 

toward the Divine. It IS the Divine. God and the Universe

spoke to me. It is all, always, speaking to us. And what it says

 

is endless

it brings wholeness

 

to the precious moment. It goes away

when one tries to pin it down, as I do. I say less and less

 

as I try to describe it. It is endlessly

generative. It is good

 

but pitiless and merciful. It demands of us

that we arrive. And now that the thinking manifests

 

in a way that allows

for union and a bridge, in a way that avoids

 

easy condemnation, a thinking that reveals

the links toward light

 

in motion, a primordial

form of being

 

in a new world that needs no one

to believe in it, a vast chasm

 

in what a bureaucracy of thought

tries to pin us down with, the hole in time

 

that allows us to be free

is here, we know it. All of us

 

can see through delusion. There is no road

in the aftermath of earthquakes, no need for the time

 

to extinguish the elements, no person

locked to your heart

 

in the morning, no water to drink

without thirst, no air is necessary to breathe

 

under the water of seeing, no

need for the earth to do anything

 

other than revolve, in this

new light. Space

 

undoes our links

to the immovable. We deliver

 

the undone to the plains

and see what the harvest

 

will fill with seed. The whole

does not exist

 

within outlines. All we can do

is move to it. The music

 

is unheard of

in this world. It exists

 

without origin. It is otherworldly,

primordial, and gentle. It vibrates,

 

equally, in the Lamb, in

the Lotus, in

 

the stones—there is no place

unknown to it. It is

 

music, and nothing more,

and nothing less. It is that

 

everywhere possible. It is harmonious

infinitely, and allows for any sound. To some

 

it might seem like noise, but that

is only the part. To achieve it

 

one need only listen. I cannot always

hear it, but I have

 

heard it. And now

in my new mind, I listen for it

 

undaunted and silent. I feel it filling

my body with love. Sometimes

 

I have horrific thoughts. But I am learning

that these are but strong notes

 

in the fullness

of the music

 

of my new mind. I can’t always hear the song,

but I feel it now. It makes all context

 

vast. I will receive it

as long as it is here. I will not push

 

one way or the other with it. It is a fullness

and does not want to be made

 

into a force. It is a force

without me, and only to the degree

 

to which this is true. No longer being able

to receive it

 

will imply a failure

of my imagination, of my ethics,

 

and my spirit. There is no way

to hold on to it. It serves

 

no one. And it includes us all. To continue to receive it

more fully

 

I grow. This implies

the world. It implies clarity. It implies

 

motion. But it rests motionlessly. If I have a softness in my voice

it is caused by this music. When I don’t

 

I feel less. My voice can be loud

to receive it, but this loudness

 

cannot be yoked

in outlines. There is nothing I can do.

 

There is nothing to expect. I can only

let it go. And I can only be afraid

 

of the horror of my thoughts

without this music. But now that I know

 

a taste of it, I have

hope. Good people

 

feed it. I haven’t always known

what to do with it and others. But now

 

I am a little less confused

about this. This is due

 

to Buddhism, the little that I know

of its practice. And to love. But it does not stop

 

at my experience. I am ignorant

and cannot offer knowledge. Except this

 

music

does not require knowledge. I’m not sure

 

what it requires. It requires

to be received, but does not need us. Is there a pact

 

between humanity

and God? I don’t know. Is there a God?

 

I don’t know. I’m not sure the question

is enough on its own. Or maybe it is, if God

 

is not limited by concept. And concept

seems to be only a note in this song. Problems

 

feed it. “Love

is the absence of fear.” And “love

 

believes all things,

yet is never deceived.” I aim

 

to see through my delusions. I aim

to be one of many, a small voice

 

in the song of the world. I rest

in silence

 

as I always have. “To have a view

as vast as the sky

 

and as fine

as a grain of sand.” All beings

 

want to be loved

and to be free

 

from suffering. We strive

diligently

 

to learn the vast expanse

and the laser pointed focus

 

of this gift. Remember that light

makes us. And that in this

 

new world, more and more

is made of light. And if that is the case,

 

we move to move

the light of the world. Someday,

 

perhaps, we will move

the light

 

of the computer world. Only the compassionate

and true

 

will be able to do so. Because only they

can be selfless enough

 

to let it move through them. I am not there

to move it

 

but I saw this. Long ago. Briefly. I was offered

a glimpse. It is utterly simple and beyond

 

thought. There is hope. Intention

is a thought. So one

 

sees. I cannot tangle

myself

 

in the line. But only to bridge. That is part of why

it will all move. But I cannot wait

 

until that is possible

to become. I can wait

 

eternally and actively in the world

to remain

 

still. With the calm and expansive

link

 

that allows us to live, so preciously

together, I see through

 

the trouble that startles me, every moment

and allow the seeing

 

of my inner eye

to burn through it. I do not remember

 

what Zyprexa was like any longer. Except that it seems

I have more to work with now, with my mind. And these

 

words are plain, so as to be careful in this new place. I see

that they do not break open my heart, as I read. And for that

 

I relinquish this poem, and allow it to be only

a mark on the road to further inquiry. I allow it to see

 

as I have made a vow to bridge, that my life

aims to be whole, even in the face of potential

 

catastrophes, I grow more and more

to accept death as it arrives, to allow it to soften me,

 

and to transform me as I have been transformed through Geodon, only

to know that there is an isthmus, and that it is eternal. Only that there is one

 

heart to allow myself to speak

in the storms of tribulation, as one speaks

 

to allow the teamwork of the fabric of need

of the bird malingerer to see this

 

in the aftermath of one who has died. Like a bicycle never once

together enough to ride, I see this word here, again, to the removal

 

of a people, to the homeland of union and pace, to the isthmus

of a double link, one ocean to another, one continent

 

to another, to the only union (even as it may be erased in my history), the place

of one heart to allow the song to continue through conflict

 

as she saw it then, one time, far away, when I hadn’t known yet, that this

would be timeless. And there is one to it there to see it there, to allow

 

it there to become and to see there as one is there to see

and to allow one to arrive with it there and to see, and to be one with it

 

there as one is there to be with it. And to see there as one is there to believe

as it is one to believe it there

 

and to see it there as one with the soil and the air and the light and rain

and to be there with one to be there one with it there once again, and to see it there

 

and to believe as there is one there to believe it there again and to see. And to see

there as one is there to believe as it is there again

 

and to see there as one is there to arrive and to be with it

there and to see it there once again and to see it there again

 

and to believe as there is one to it again and to see and to hold

and to see it there and to hold

 

being that nothing holds

dissolving

 written in transition from Zyprexa 10 mg/night to Geodon 160 mg/night—December 23, 2009 (transition started), January 2, 2010 (poem started)

 

 

"
"

waking to the news of an eventual collapse, those ejected minds

of the walking thing of the speech of birds, they announce their own

development from ashes to make a song and deliver the hunted

landscape to its stars, those of us who knew something of the engine

would remove the approach to animals as a second wind, the coming

of pages of light and nectar, but once the arrival of her tent

would move the inhabitants of the Sea, and the consciousness of the Ocean

to pursue the network that sparks their shining single dream

to the pavement, the oceanic feet that would not muse its face or

deter those breaks from the second light of the morning, or one would

say the easy atonements that their push from the animal

would enlarge so that they would speak and we would understand,

these assembly code calypsos deter the kindly face that hates and pummels

as these will undo their coloring and the fur of the path. do not stop

until you know it well with both feet.

 

"
"

your values aren’t right

for this age

or memory

 

color line. globes

of the Sea

survive revelation

 

as the Moon reflects

its own interior

revolver. I live

 

as a condemned

callused body

under salt water sand, far from your destructions. where are

 

the people of the lost (shut out the hate)

arc, in a service (love so remote)

to more water? worn

 

eclipse of a human

emergence, foils of the barricade

a face speaks

 

from isomorphic ferns

lines of sacrifice

burn the god of a naked mammal

 

I am the Loon

“the silence of our

beautiful consciousness”

 

“in love with everything

you make it impossible to be myself in this

place. where can I go?” – Baraka

 

attentive score

for the core

of death: black, red, and white as I wake

 

an expansive heart

absorbs all the evil

a veil of the world

 

and cancels

the Loon’s empty

submergence

 

for more of the deep

currents of the light’s

darkest refuge. I am the Loon

 

I hunt with blood in my eyes

 

I wander in the morning

and float above

the wound fish of the spirits

 

"
"

[we] are watching a documentary about home

birth when [you] first feel [neni] kick // embryo

 

of hope // they say plastic is the perfect creation

because it never dies // litters the beaches

 

of o‘ahu, this “gathering place” // the doctor

recommends a c-section // in the sea, plastic multiplies

 

into smaller pieces, leaches estrogenic and toxic

chemicals // if [we] cut open the bellies of whales

 

and large fish, what fragments will [we] find, derived

from oil, absorbed into tissue // because plastic

 

never dissolves, every product ever made still exists,

somewhere, today // i wish my daughter was made

 

of plastic so that she will survive [our] wasteful

hands // so that she, too, will have a great future

 

"
"







After Mark Levine







1

                                                                        My father, just

out of his teens, stands on the rooftop

of the embassy in Saigon, his birthplace.

He gives his hand to his mother,

and all around them, a thousand hands reach up

 

not to wave. None of his siblings died.

Their bodies like a fine chain balled tight

in a fist. They made it out alive.

Why is he looking at me like this?

 

2

 

This is the idea of a house my father built

in Southern California. These two circle windows

and bamboo on all sides. He brought a jungle here,

complete with French doors.

These are the tiles from his mother’s house, cool

against my cheek. I talk to him in one tongue,

he answers from the morgue.

 

3

 

Let’s get on with it.

When I return to that house, I eat the food

left out for my dead brother. I don’t waste much.

I slide open and close his closet, untangle

the window blinds. The bees are quiet in the

walls, now, their colonies dying off.

His shoes on my father’s feet are the only moving thing

in sight.

 

4

 

On their flight to America,

the choice for lunch was rice or pasta, but when

the meal cart reached them, there was only pasta.

My father smiled at the flight attendant and asked,

Why didn’t you reap enough rice?

 

5

 

The certificates we use to be certain of each other:

ID cards, contracts, permits, deeds,

fishing licenses, driving licenses, car titles, carry permits,

registrations, income statements, IOUs, testimonials,

certificates of birth, custody, and death, letters of consent.

Do I have permission to approach

a drowning man from behind?

 

6

 

I dreamed last night, my mother says,

that you were in danger and your brother was young still,

though you were the same

as you are now.

He was looking for me and I was looking for you.

 

7

 

I sit at my desk, typing and deleting

words.

Twice I dreamed I fucked my brother.

I keep trying to wake up. I keep getting things wrong.

I’m ready to feel better.

 

 

"
"

Gradually a girl’s innocence itself becomes her major crime

A doe and her two fawns bent low in the sumac along the bank of a highway,

     the pinched peach of their ears twitching in the heat

Into the disordered evening my brother cut out only his face from every

     photograph in the hall, carefully slipping each frame back into position

What good does it do?

Decades of no faces other than our own chipping faces

What good does it do, this resemblance to nothing we know of the dollhouse

New parents watch their newborn resting in a sunny patch of an empty

      room, the newborn making sense of its container—

And from the road a deer ripened in death and a tuft of fur—or dandelion—

     tumbled along, gently circled, driftwood, shaking loose, gathered,

     dissolving into the mouths of jewelweed nearby

Earth is rife with iron and blood is rich in stardust

Immediately I spotted one hoof print, then nothing, as if this was where she

      dragged herself out of the body

Strips of tire torn from their orbitIs it right then, that we are left to hurtle alone

 

"
"

1

 

There is a house in me. It is empty. I empty it.

 

Negative space: the only native emptiness there is.

There is

 

 

2

 

An alarm goes off. It goes on and on. When the alarm

drifts to different parts of the room,

 

I realize, that alarm is the sun.

 

 

3

 

And there is no one who does not need,

 

never an empty seat. And the blind one,

 

he does not find a place. There is a god in him

helping him to need himself.

 

 

4

 

A mother sticks a spoon into my chest,

which is an empty bowl, actually,

 

so the spoon lands quickly

and loudly. Heartbreak in the heart! she says.

 

When you love someone

more than you’ve ever known you could, it is

a good thing, except for the terrifying

 

realization that one day there comes

a parting.

 

"
"







J'aurais dans mes mains ton visage obscur

—Yves Bonnefoy







[1]

what should i call this poem i’ll call it a rush of chambers

a racket of foliage i’ll call it love poem with dark

face pretty title someone i don’t know who tells me watch

out for words with meaning don’t look for truth in beauty

learn to breathe with your gaze in an art gallery

a woman with sad eyes devours rats devours picassos

sleeps in hospital rooms listen to this story once upon

a time a princess bah death will not be long in coming

death with its blue eyes on my empty plate

 

[2]

she’ll never know who i am she’s blind and hates when people

look at her i offer her a bonfire a fistful of snow offer her

a freshly cut rose what should we talk about now? let’s talk

about the sky let’s talk about fear there’s going to be a storm tonight

a person would do better to drop and never get up how’s that i ask

but she disappears i don’t know if she’ll ever return still

i wait with my milk tooth with my old stamp

collection with my razor blade and a mirror at night

she comes whispers in my ear there’s no one but you

in a million years i’ll learn her real name know

her dark face flush with sky flush with fear

 

[3]

why am i writing this? you incandescent pupil i’m a swan

that dreams of dying in your dream inside a box where hell burns

where everything is blinding the storm doesn’t say a word stays mute

you should have seen me that time the vineyards were

in bloom the cows were grazing i was happy you were happy

the enigma’s transparence cooled our coffee the myth’s

dissection the death of any and all theories i’m a swan

my dream is to die in your dream why didn’t you look at me?

 

[4]

my students asked me what is the meaning of pain

so i sliced a doll’s finger with a razor blade there

was no blood no batting of lashes this i told them is pain

 

[5]

i read and write at the same time it’s only proper the mountains

overwhelmingly approve the night shuts one eye and looks at me

with the other there is nothing around but plastic flowers

purgatories on the brink of closure doors and windows the light

grows impatient time destroys clocks may i speak?

there’s no need to the pages are on fire your lamp is burning

i take off my clothes and let the cold ignite my penis

 

[6]

now i come to the hardest part of the story the part

where i talk about porpoises and dolphins the woman

with the sad eyes vomits rats into the toilet i speak of

my desire i don’t want her to know about it i’ll just say a word

brush my hand against her hair and if she runs ah the lost words

the dark rooms each with its death rattle of birds

all soaring skyward the woman closes her eyes

go in me she says i’ve forgotten your name i don’t have

a name from high above the bed a god observes us

his wounded body conveying how much she wants me

 

[7]

sorrowful boy come whenever you like i’ll burn in your memory sear

your tongue all kinds of confusion will find a place in your senses

any expression will be allegory in our hands i have a notebook

for you a glass of water some dead fish i said to her sorrowful girl

i love notebooks await every night a glass of water

on my tongue dead fish are a delirium my students

ask what’s delirium i unbutton my shirt and show them

your breasts this is delirium

 

[8]

a rush of overflowing chambers it’s playtime now you’re

the shadow and i’m the light you lick my wounds while i sink

into the lightning flash into both sets of darkness where you sleep

and i await the word smoke is the word tomorrow

your body and mine will sing and there will again be woods

unfurling before my eyes open venetian blinds a fount

of angels atop the dirty laundry tell me a story anything

what’s important is that we awaken and not give in to sleep

happy loves rot as surely as blighted ones do

bye bye she says bye bye flowers in her wounded hands

 

[9]

to let the body not love drift through other bodies

that’s how banishment how violent expulsion begins quite

a lovely light is dying amid the debris no one can see it

ice is deceptive when it shines bright the sky an irrevocable

past a voice inspiring pity a voice that never reaches us

 

[10]

disturbing the marble slab’s geometry beneath her feet

the sought-after metaphor is a blue cyclone the dark alley

the grave of all projects though nothing stands in our way

we can be happy but there’s no one here only me besides

the words the untimely trips and scarlet buses i remember

her light which made the pain grow dark and still she went away

i followed until i lost her trace no one ever taught me to lose a desire

a purple cloud envelopes my body the students ask me

what is a body i draw a word in the air the word bursts

and drops to the ground this i tell them is a body

 

"
"

[1]

i wonder where the title the smoke of distant fires comes from

i heard it in a park once at the back of my creeping devoted

ear the moon was red the forest as always abloom with

heliotropes and blue begonias yes i heard it in a park once

a dog was barking the moon was red the sun had already set

 

[2]

eyeing my steps she’d say good but with less emphasis

the words stank to high heaven the serpent was singing sweetly

careful she told me it’s a monstrosity a misshapen beast

years ago i placed a leaf from a linden tree on his back

which left only a scratch a mere flesh wound where time

records its march where the mangled falcon sleeps the blood

on kriemhild’s breasts recalling the blood on kriemhild’s

breasts her death at the hands of some hunter of wild

boars the serpent was dancing the moon was red the

hero didn’t seem to notice i have lost the pot of gold

he said i don’t know who could have stolen it from me

 

[3]

the trees let go of their branches allowing them to fall

it was spring and they couldn’t bear the weight of the snow

the sun shone darkly deer came down from the hills

rats fled the swamp and everything before me was allegory

yet i didn’t write a word

 

[4]

who is eyeing my steps? who is dictating me words?

who is telling me now is the time? i don’t know

 

who is eyeing my steps who is dictating me words who

is telling me now is the time

 

[5]

i’m with my parents in melbourne this has to be a dream

i’ve never been to melbourne my parents look at a plate of

food with no interest one way or the other i feel uncomfortable

at times that’s how i remember you i can never get past

your eyes i don’t have any eyes ask siegfried ask the serpent

ask him what’s become of your words of the papers you

tossed in the wastebasket of the much hoped-for rain in the linden

tree forest i’m talking about hell about charon’s coins

about the barking dog the one that won’t let us sleep

 

[6]

we’re not in melbourne and this is no dream truth

to tell i don’t know where we are i see a park nearby hear

some music the rustling of leaves we’re alone tonight

you’re like a tiger i love your fear the streak of light rending

your shadow the solar mantle where beauty burns forget

the flesh for a moment forget about beauty for now you’re

with me tonight why is the moon so red she asks

 

[7]

it isn’t night and we aren’t in park we’re in thebais

at either the beginning or the end of a storm it’s like a line

you know by heart memory can be so cruel preserving

a marble column a red desert and nothing else around them

but rocks spiders scorpions a pious crowd and a rabbit

why a pious crowd she asks why a rabbit i must have read

about them in a poem seen them in a medieval painting or some

movie short perhaps praying high in the air i grasped the serpent

and if a cloud brushed my ears i gave god thanks for it was his hand

he ordered me to read but no one had ever taught me how

 

[8]

you must be simeon then she said pointing out my sandals

my lack of social graces my eyes brimming over with desert

 

[9]

she listens to the rustling of the leaves to the whistling of the wind

tell me we’ve always been here tell me you never went away

read me the part about the hero’s betrayal the dream of the eagle

devouring the falcon tell me it’s nighttime our neighbors wave

at us with no interest one way or the other the birds pick apart

     their nests

on the riverbank a dog barks a dog that won’t let us sleep

 

[10]

water and mud common ground sketch their alphabet the metaphor

is burning i see it shrivel to nothing amid the rubble we don’t

need to write don’t need to read tonight the serpent

is very excited for it’s celebrating a birth as the words rot

and the moon shines a charon’s palm what should i do?

 

hold on to it she says write the smoke of distant fires

 

"
"

Wandering slowly back after dark one night

above a river, toward a suspension bridge,

a sound concerns him that might be a tune

or might not: noise drifting in, trailing off.

 

Then concerns him again, now clearly a song

pulsing out from the opposite bank, being sung

by chorusing men, all pewter-haired or bald,

in the function suite of a shabby hotel.

Above their heads a conductor’s hand

draws and casts the notes with a white wand.

 

Songs about mills and mines and a great war,

about mermaid brides and solid gold hills,

songs from broken hymnbooks and cheesy films.

 

Then his father’s voice rising out of that choir,

and his father’s father’s voice, and voices

of fathers before, concerning him only,

arcing through charged air and spanning the gorge.

He steps over the cliff edge and walks across.

"
"

It’s evening again, late.I go out into the laneand doodle a beard and mustacheon the face of the moonwith a red pen.

 Over the next hillan old teacher of minetakes off her glassesand wipes the lenses with a soft cloth.She can’t believewhat she’s just seen.

 

"
"

Look at us

We are of earth and water

Look at them

It is the same

Look at us

We are suffering all these years

Look at them

They are connected

Look at us

We are in pain

Look at them

Surprised at our anger

Look at us

We are struggling to survive

Look at them

Expecting sorrow be benign

 

Look at us

We are the ones called pagan

Look at them

On their arrival

Look at us

We are called subversive

Look at them

Descending from name callers

Look at us

We wept sadly in the long dark

Look at them

Hiding in technologic light

Look at us

We buried the generations

Look at them

Inventing the body count

Look at us

We are older than America

Look at them

Chasing a fountain of youth

 

Look at us we are embracing earth

Look at them

Clutching today

Look at us

We are living in the generations

Look at them

Existing in jobs and debt

Look at us

We have escaped many times

Look at them

They cannot remember

Look at us

We are healing

Look at them

Their medicine is patented

Look at us

We are trying

Look at them

What are they doing

Look at us

We are children of earth

Look at them

Who are they

 

"
"

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

After we’ve already bled for you

Already been dead to you

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

Chapters of a democracy story

Descendants of genocide

Twelve score and more years ago

We went from being the majority

To being the smallest minority

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

We saw that emptying

Early morning skyline

Back through that horizon

Duck Valley 1979, Wounded Knee

Sand Creek, that Trail of Tears

Exactly how did our land

Become your country

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

While we’re still crying tears of our own

 

With your past as your future

That industrial ruling class

Using religion as a weapon

Distilling love into hate

Pointing fingers and name calling evil

Sacrificing lives and blood

Making the innocent the new virgins

Offering to the gods of profit

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

In the homeland security

Pretending corporate corruption

Isn’t economic terrorism

Money talks while the government listens

Compiling files on ones who think different

Conditioning an acceptance of debt

And not to expect the truth

So get used to hearing the lie

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

Misusing the beauty

Turning freedom into a killing machine

Mass murdering the environment

Weaponizing the psychology of fear

And pushing material addiction with

A substitution of rules faking the law

The bill of rights becomes collateral damage

Making the constitution another broken treaty

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

Way this story is unfolding

We may end up crying together

As in crying at the same time

But we’re short on tears to cry for you

With all these tears to cry of our own

Now you want us

To cry your tears for you

 

"
"

You wanna know what happened to Elvis

I’ll tell you what happened

I oughta know man I was one of his army

I mean man I was on his side

He made us feel all right

We were the first wave in the

Postwar baby boom

The generation before had just come

Out of the Great Depression and World War II

You know heavy vibes for people to wear

So much heaviness like some kind of

Voiding of the emotions

 

Their music you know the songs

Life always carries

You know every culture has songs

Well anyway their music was

Restrained emotion

You know like you didn’t wanna dance

If you didn’t know how

Which says something strange

Well anyway Elvis came along

About ten years after the nuke

When the only generals America had in

The only army she had were Ike and Mac

And stupor hung over the land

A plague where everyone tried to

Materially free themselves

Still too shell-shocked to understand

To feel what was happening

 

Everything was getting hopeless

Then when Elvis started to rock

The roll just picked up

I mean drabness the beaver showed us

Could only be a foretold future

Who wanted to be Ward and June and

I mean father never did know best

He was still crazy from surviving the war

 

Like there was this psychotic pall

So widespread as to be assumed normal

Heavy man     you know really

Anyway Elvis showed us an out

You know he showed everyboyman and

Everygirlwoman there’s something good

In feeling good

Like a prophet for everyboy everygirl

When someones mom and dad lied

Something about him told us

To be sensual is really okay

Someones mom and dad waltzed us around

Everygirl wasn’t supposed to enjoy it

If she did she was bad and everyboy

Well boys will be boys don’t feel anything

Take what you can

Marry a decent girl when the fun’s done

Like no matter what we did we all were guilty

Maybe someones mom and dad resented

What they missed and while

They were trying to pass it on us

We heard Elvis’s song and

For the first time we made up our own mind

 

The first wave rebelled

I mean we danced even if we didn’t know how

I mean Elvis made us move

Instead of standing mute he raised our voice

And when we heard ourselves               something

Was changing you know like for the first time

We made a collective decision about choices

 

America hurriedly made Pat Boone

A general in the army they wanted us to join

But most of us held fast to Elvis

And the commandants around him

Chuck Berry Buddy Holly Little Richard

Bo Diddley Gene Vincent     you know

Like a different civil war all over again

 

I mean you take don’t be cruel

I want you I need you I love you

And jailhouse rock

Or you take Pat and his white bucks

Singing love letters in the sand

Hell man what’s real here

I mean Pat at the beach in his white bucks

His ears getting sunburned told us

Something about old wave delusion

I mean wanting and needing and imprisonment

We all been to those places but what did

White bucks at the beach understand

Other than more straight line dancing

You know what I mean

 

Anyway man for a while we had a breather

Fresh energy to keep us from falling into the big sleep

Then before long Elvis got assassinated in all the fame

Taking a long time to die       others seized

Control while Elvis rode the needle out

Never understanding what he’d done

 

It’s like we were the baby boom because

Life needed a fresher start

I mean two world wars in a row is

Really crazy man

And Elvis even though he didn’t know he said it

He showed it to us anyway and even though

We didn’t know we heard it        we heard it anyway

 

Man like he woke us up

And now they’re trying to put us

Back to sleep so we’ll see how it goes

Anyway look at the record man

Rock ’n’ roll is based on revolution

Going way past 33 1/3

You gotta understand man he was

America’s baby boom Che

I oughta know man     I was in his army

 

 

"
"

Reading poetry from Central America

After talking with my brother

Suddenly remembering how they kill

Couldn’t really say it straight before

They told me you were dead

I died

They told me your mother was dead

I died again

They told me the kids were dead

I died with each name

 

Fire

The government said accident

They lied

Duck Valley my El Salvador

Our last kiss was our last good-bye

They came for you in winter’s night

Winter’s wind wailed in mourning

Government people searched for days

Scene of crime digging through ashes

Looking for body parts and disturbing evidence

We buried you all in a large grave

While a blizzard covered us in a blanket of snow

How it stormed terrible pain in the land of the free

 

Some ones should have noticed

Fewer women laughing

Some ones should have noticed

Fewer children growing up

But this isn’t El Salvador

 

Warm strong willed woman

I still have memories you gave me

Maybe if we recognized peasant eyes

Maybe if we recognized plantation lies

Archbishop Romero would have nothing

On you

Trying not to cry how will I ever stop

Ever see a wounded lion try hiding pain

Watch out it doesn’t work

But this isn’t El Salvador

 

At times I feel every embrace we shared

At times every tender moment still lives

Met Sandinista who touched my cheek

Kind of like you used to

Said to me you are one of us

But this isn’t El Salvador

 

Gentle woman natural mother natural world

Some people won’t comprehend what happens

Who wants realities cluttered by acts of war

Have to keep a lot inside at times

Not offending people with words

They don’t want to see pictures of

But this isn’t El Salvador

 

Some people told me I’m strong to survive

I’m not strong I’m not weak     no morality

No right no wrong one tear at a time I fall I rise

But this isn’t El Salvador

 

You loved your people

In the face of the American dream

Fry bread and tortillas some wars are the same

Who thinks Wounded Knee and Sand Creek

Happen only in history books      is this not history

We live we die                       but this isn’t El Salvador

 

The first look you gave me

Your eyes spoke your spirit your heart

My heart our heart there was no other way

Some ones say we’re with you brother

We understand what’s been done

Some ones say but this isn’t El Salvador

This is America                     yes I know

Almost two thousand seasons

We fall we rise       we fall we rise

 

 

"
"

          “goaam”   ~

 

                        “goam”   ~

 

“islas de las velas latinas”           (of lateen sails    ~

              “guan”                             “guana”   ~

 

                        “islas de los ladrones”     (of the thieves   ~

 

“guåhan”                                      “guajan”   ~

 

“islas marianas”

 

                                                     (after the spanish queen    ~

 

“bahan”                                                     “guhan”   ~

 

             “guacan”                                       “isla de san juan”   ~

 

“guaon”

 

              “y guan”

 

“omiya jima”                                             (great shrine island)

 

             “guam”

 

                                         “the first province

  

                                                    of the great ocean”    ~

 

                        geographic absence   ~

 

“the old census records show”

 

              because who can stand on the               reef

and name that below water        and sky

 

              imagined territory    ~

 

                          “a spanish baptismal name and”

 

                                      burnt villages

 

                                                   archipelago of

 

“chamoru last names drawn from

            the lexicon of everyday language”

 

                         bone

                                         

                                                    carved word

 

             ~

 

“it is possible they changed

            their last names throughout their lives”

 

                        remade : sovereign

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

"
"

Out of every hundred people

those who always know better:

fifty-two.

Unsure of every step:

almost all the rest.

Ready to help,

if it doesn't take long:

forty-nine.

Always good,

because they cannot be otherwise:

four—well, maybe five.

Able to admire without envy:

eighteen.

Led to error

by youth (which passes):

sixty, plus or minus.

Those not to be messed with:

forty and four.

Living in constant fear

of someone or something:

seventy-seven.

Capable of happiness:

twenty-some-odd at most.

Harmless alone,

turning savage in crowds:

more than half, for sure.

Cruel

when forced by circumstances:

it's better not to know,

not even approximately.

Wise in hindsight:

not many more

than wise in foresight.

Getting nothing out of life except things:

thirty

(though I would like to be wrong).

Doubled over in pain

and without a flashlight in the dark:

eighty-three, sooner or later.

Those who are just:

quite a few at thirty-five.

But if it takes effort to understand:

three.

Worthy of empathy:

ninety-nine.

Mortal:

one hundred out of one hundred—

a figure that has never varied yet.

 

"
"

The fog

shades

a smooth

stone bust

 

then slips

into rain

 

my mind is

well suited

onyx

shining edges

 

the reflection

itself

 

*

 

Traces of

mist

 

on an old

window

 

*

 

The best part

is grinding

the ink down

endlessly, filling

my brush

 

grey morning

 

I first feel

the mind

as reflex

 

*

Bright and clear

 

The end of Evergreen road

is closed and crumbling away

 

Bill McNeil’s red poppy

resolves to be eaten alive

exposed to a shaft of air

 

between the flower and its flat glass-

masterful

 

*

 

The black bleeds out

from his beak

 

in long tears, ink onto

sopping head feathers

slicked back

 

black stiches on yellow

powdered eyes aglow

 

white speckles

          thrown onto autumn

                       breast feathers

 

a white field

                   below

 

"
"

Even now, after all

these years, my father, 89,

still uncertain when I call

whose voice it is—Ann's or mine—

 

saying Hi, Dad, and from where,

the next town or a different state,

still pausing in that powdered air,

this little silence as he waits

 

at the nursery door, discerning tone

and pitch, listening hard to know

which way to bend, which crib, the one

against the wall or by the window,

 

still concentrating, trying to keep

us separate, our needs, do whatshe would, letting my mother sleep,

this moment's blank as he's about

 

to choose between us, make some shift

in the soft-lit dark, decide whose cry

it is tonight, which girl to lift,

to whisper or hum, which lullaby.

 

"
"

You whom I could not save,Listen to me.

 

Can we agree Kevlar

backpacks shouldn’t be needed

 

for children walking to school?

Those same children

 

also shouldn’t require a suit

of armor when standing

 

on their front lawns, or snipers

to watch their backs

 

as they eat at McDonalds.

They shouldn’t have to stop

 

to consider the speed

of a bullet or how it might

 

reshape their bodies. But

one winter, back in Detroit,

 

I had one student

who opened a door and died.

 

It was the front

door of his house, but

 

it could have been any door,

and the bullet could have written

 

any name. The shooter

was thirteen years old

 

and was aiming

at someone else. But

 

a bullet doesn’t care

about “aim,” it doesn’t

 

distinguish between

the innocent and the innocent,

 

and how was the bullet

supposed to know this

 

child would open the door

at the exact wrong moment

 

because his friend

was outside and screaming

 

for help. Did I say

I had “one” student who

 

opened a door and died?

That’s wrong.

 

There were many.

The classroom of grief

 

had far more seats

than the classroom for math

 

though every student

in the classroom for math

 

could count the names

of the dead.

 

A kid opens a door. The bullet

couldn’t possibly know,

 

nor could the gun, because

“guns don’t kill people,” they don’t

 

have minds to decide

such things, they don’t choose

 

or have a conscience,

and when a man doesn’t

 

have a conscience, we call him

a psychopath. This is how

 

we know what type of assault rifle

a man can be,

 

and how we discover

the hell that thrums inside

 

each of them. Today,

there’s another

 

shooting with dead

kids everywhere. It was a school,

 

a movie theater, a parking lot.

The world

 

is full of doors.

And you, whom I cannot save,

 

you may open a door

and enter

 

a meadow or a eulogy.

And if the latter, you will be

 

mourned, then buried

in rhetoric.

 

There will be

monuments of legislation,

 

little flowers made

from red tape.

 What should we do? we’ll ask

again. The earth will close

 

like a door above you.What should we do?

 

And that click you hear?

That’s just our voices,

 

the deadbolt of discourse

sliding into place.

 

"
"

My grammar, ‘tis of thee. Sweet

simultaneity when water came down

the hillside in a pipe and a local

Cineplex of Oedipus

armegeddoned us into a past

no future could agree on. Nation

 

was another thing to notice,

how shirts and skins, ironies

and their opposite eyed

each other before the big game.

Sneak up, affections. Be covert

in the open. If I sing, I believe

 

in wire taps bootless on be-

citizened faces, that phat, that

sick: help. We’ve given up

the romance of weather,

although I once felt so much

for a man who wore oven mitts

 

in the snow. Land where my fathers

pilgrimmed all we can depend

on, this freedom majestic in

the jest that will what—blah, op-ed

and blather us over, excelsis

deo zapping rust from our names.

 

The word “to” is understood.

And it’s thy placey memories

I love, darling tongue of my tongue,

unique as any finger print

in groove and grubbiness. Always

someone becomes the subject

 

re-collecting these minutes

meandering like so many sheep

that run before our steps,

and the red or blue X’s on their hinds

say who owns them as they go

upslope, in rain, over the stubby grass.

"
"

Holed up behind the whitewashed wooden slats

slung like ribs above the greed-begotten candy plaster-

papered noworlaters, holed up and far

from witches in the woods’ evergreen fringe,

horse chestnut brews, parents’ crow commotion or

robin squabble haranguing the fat

wide open always out there, I read for hours

on the red shag rug hearing market cry

and grave slope, catching the men through ages

of flint and full haggle in my 2 by 6 chamber,

heart bent on Blue Beard, the dead wives’

skeletons cantilevered to a door hook. Later,

hunkering down with amputee hangers,

catalogs, the bottle stash and jug wines,

Jim Beams too hiding with air, no air,

plus a stolen Joy of Sex circa 1974,

its pell mell positions and crouching

women, with the POV going scrap and rattle,

some theater of being a little less bright.

Thought I saw one night the million paired eyes

swinging upward, the hand me down generations

spelunking in holes, fine lineaments braved

by way of cream curd and lust and dictatorial DNA,

felt through overhead squib and carpet warp,

some full squat before the slate rock hearths,

more buried in strata of granites, igneous,

limestone, ash, the mind’s eye leveled

to one rectangle of light around the animal

who wants to know that it knows and say so,

lumbering down the long path, vanishing.

 

"
"

Drippingly by grips, this humus and perlite nearly sings

          through my fingers

circling the ditch lily’s heat-sunk side, anthers frayed, fallen.

          Sift. Learn your footprint.

If occasion, rise to. Another bloom, opposite, grows blood

          orange its splayed

open hand, in shade, still opulent, curls tender, having the time

          of its life.

Let’s get the basics, the survey says. Sight says, turning,

          the cat’s sprawled

besides the baby rat it found and above the scalp thin lawn

          through the window

the children are watching. Where do you live? What’s under your

          roof? What brushes

up, by now, is summer burnt grass in scorch and stubble with

          the rat who will not

move. Lent pallor. Light gray lumpen weight. How many rooms

          do you own? Keep

digging, mom, get to china, they call out, when I work the plant

          free, its dirt

tumbling thick with rooted tendrils reaching. Are you a gadget

          geek, a regular

joe, or technophone? Plus crumbs, wedged in pine cones,

          tunnels,

earthworm ruts. There’s nothing I can’t touch here if I want

          to or disturb,

teeming sum of what we’re built on, soil damps beside dry

          pockets, clay

at the spade end gone that unctuous apricot yellow. Refine

          your results.

The cat’s long patient, knows what her hurt can do.

          She waits, ginger

lines of her fur circling. What’s on your plate/

          in your medicine

cabinet/jewelry box/garage? I look closer. The infant rodent

          is trembling.

Another child, not mine, labors deep to find the shine,

          sorting pebbles

through her fingers. Make progress. Take action.

          Witness

not permitted distance. When the prey finally moves,

          jumps a few inches, the cat

closes in, takes the injured flaccid thing into his jaws

          for the kill

and carries it almost like a kitten across the lawn.

          My hand crushes

the dark stamens and the littlest child

          upstairs

at the rat’s last squeal, begins to scream best,

          best, thisis the best day of my life, and I have to walk back inside.

 

"
"

                                                    As we

                                        embrace          resist

                          the future       the present      the past

             we work          we struggle          we begin          we fail

​

to understand       to find        to unbraid        to accept        to question

 

              the grief          the grief           the grief          the grief

                          we shift         we wield           we bury​

                                    into light               as ash                                                       across our faces

 

"
"











Orphan in my first years, I early learnt


To make my heart suffice itself, and seek


Support and sympathy in its own depths.

 









Well, read my cheek, and watch my eye, —

    Too strictly school'd are they

One secret of my soul to show,

    One hidden thought betray.

 

I never knew the time my heart

    Look'd freely from my brow;

It once was check'd by timidness,

     'Tis taught by caution now.

 

I live among the cold, the false,

    And I must seem like them;

And such I am, for I am false

   As those I most condemn.

 

I teach my lip its sweetest smile,

    My tongue its softest tone;

I borrow others' likeness, till

    Almost I lose my own.

 

I pass through flattery's gilded sieve,

    Whatever I would say;

In social life, all, like the blind,

    Must learn to feel their way.

 

I check my thoughts like curbed steeds

    That struggle with the rein;

I bid my feelings sleep, like wrecks

    In the unfathom'd main.

 

I hear them speak of love, the deep.

    The true, and mock the name;

Mock at all high and early truth,

    And I too do the same.

 

I hear them tell some touching tale,

    I swallow down the tear;

I hear them name some generous deed,

    And I have learnt to sneer.

 

I hear the spiritual, the kind,

    The pure, but named in mirth;

Till all of good, ay, even hope,

    Seems exiled from our earth.

 

And one fear, withering ridicule,

    Is all that I can dread;

A sword hung by a single hair

    For ever o'er the head.

 

We bow to a most servile faith,

    In a most servile fear;

While none among us dares to say

    What none will choose to hear.

 

And if we dream of loftier thoughts,

    In weakness they are gone;

And indolence and vanity

    Rivet our fetters on.

 

Surely I was not born for this!

    I feel a loftier mood

Of generous impulse, high resolve,

    Steal o'er my solitude!

 

I gaze upon the thousand stars

    That fill the midnight sky;

And wish, so passionately wish,

    A light like theirs on high.

 

I have such eagerness of hope

    To benefit my kind;

And feel as if immortal power

    Were given to my mind.

 

I think on that eternal fame,

    The sun of earthly gloom.

Which makes the gloriousness of death,

    The future of the tomb —

 

That earthly future, the faint sign

    Of a more heavenly one;

— A step, a word, a voice, a look, —

    Alas! my dream is done!

 

And earth, and earth's debasing stain,

    Again is on my soul;

And I am but a nameless part

    Of a most worthless whole.

 

Why write I this? because my heart

    Towards the future springs,

That future where it loves to soar

    On more than eagle wings.

 

The present, it is but a speck

    In that eternal time,

In which my lost hopes find a home,

    My spirit knows its clime.

 

Oh! not myself, — for what am I? —

    The worthless and the weak,

Whose every thought of self should raise

    A blush to burn my cheek.

 

But song has touch’d my lips with fire.

    And made my heart a shrine;

For what, although alloy'd, debased,

    Is in itself divine.

 

I am myself but a vile link

    Amid life's weary chain;

But I have spoken hallow'd words,

    O do not say in vain!

 

My first, my last, my only wish,

    Say will my charmed chords

Wake to the morning light of fame,

    And breathe again my words?

 

Will the young maiden, when her tears

    Alone in moonlight shine —

Tears for the absent and the loved —

    Murmur some song of mine?

 

Will the pale youth by his dim lamp,

    Himself a dying flame,

From many an antique scroll beside,

    Choose that which bears my name?

 

Let music make less terrible

    The silence of the dead;

I care not, so my spirit last

    Long after life has fled.

 

"
"

Oh! yet one smile, tho' dark may lower 

Around thee clouds of woe and ill, 

Let me yet feel that I have power, 

Mid Fate's bleak storms, to soothe thee still. 

Tho' sadness be upon thy brow, 

Yet let it turn, dear love, to me, 

I cannot bear that thou should'st know 

Sorrow I do not share with thee. 

True love's wreath is of mountain flowers, 

They stand the storm and brave the blast, 

And blossom on, so love like ours 

Is sweetest when all else is past. 

Too well I know what storms have frowned, 

And now frown on life's troubled tide; 

Still darker let them gather round, 

They have no power on hearts so tried. 

Then say not that you may not bear, 

To shadow spirit light as mine; 

I shall not shrink, or fear to share 

The darkest fate if it be thine!

 

 Oh! say not love was never made 

For heart so light as mine; 

Must love then seek the cypress shade, 

Rear but a gloomy shrine. 

Oh! say not, that for me more meet 

The revelry of youth; 

Or that my wild heart cannot beat 

With deep devoted truth. 

Tho' mirth may many changes ring, 

'Tis but an outward show, 

Even upon the fond dove's wing 

Will varying colours glow. 

Light smiles upon my lip may gleam 

And sparkle o'er my brow, 

'Tis but the glisten of the stream 

That hides the gold below. 

'Tis love that gilds the mirthful hour, 

That lights the smile for me, 

Those smiles would instant lose their power, 

Did they not glance on thee!

 

 Oh! come to my slumber 

Sweet dreams of my love, 

I have hung the charmed wreath 

My soft pillow above. 

The roses are linked 

In a chain pure and white; 

And the rose-leaves are wet 

With the dew drops of night. 

The moon was on high 

As I gather'd each flower; 

The dew that then falls 

Has a magical power. 

The Spirit of slumber 

Those roses has blest; 

And sweet are the visions 

They'll bring to my rest. 

Be their spell on my soul, 

So they let me but see 

His dark eyes flash in love 

And his smile glance on me. 

Let sleep bring the image 

Of him far away; 

'Tis worth all the tears 

I shed for him by day. 

I have hung the charmed wreath 

My soft pillow above; 

Then come to my slumber, 

Sweet dreams of my love!

 

 

How vain to cast my love away 

On bosom false as thine; 

The floweret's bloom, that springs in May, 

Would be a safer shrine 

To build my fondest hopes upon, 

Tho' fragile it may be. 

That flower's smile is not sooner gone 

Than love that trusts to thee. 

Love asks a calm, a gentle home, 

Or else its life is o'er; 

If once you let its pinions roam, 

Oh! then 'tis love no more. 

The aspin's changefuI shade can be 

No shelter for the dove; 

And hearts as varying as that tree, 

Are sure no place for love. 

Hope linger'd long and anxiously, 

O'er failing faith, but now 

I give thee back each heartless sigh, 

Give back each broken vow. 

I'll trust the stay of tulip dyes, 

The calm of yon wild sea, 

The sunshine of the April skies, 

But never more to thee! 

 

 Oh! would that love had power to raise 

A little isle for us alone, 

With fairy flowers, and sunny rays, 

The blue sea wave its guardian zone. 

No other step should ever press 

This hidden Eden of the heart, 

And we would share its loveliness, 

From every other thing apart. 

The rose and violet should weep, 

Whene'er our leafy couch was laid, 

The lark should wake our morning sleep, 

The bulbul sing our serenade. 

And we would watch the starry hours, 

And call the moon to hear our vows, 

And we would cull the sweetest flowers, 

And twine fresh chaplets for our brows. 

 

 

I thought thus of the flowers, the moon, 

This fairy isle for you and me; 

And then I thought how very soon 

How very tired we should be.

 

                   Matrimonial Creed.

HE must be rich whom I could love, 

His fortune clear must be, 

Whether in land or in the funds, 

'Tis all the same to me. 

He must be old whom I could love, 

Then he'll not plague me long; 

In sooth 'twill he a pleasant sight,

To see him borne along 

To where the croaking ravens lurk, 

And where the earth worms dwell: 

A widow's hood will suit my face,

And black becomes me well. 

And he must make a settlement, 

I'll have no man without; 

And when he writes his testament, 

He must not leave me out. 

Oh! such a man as this would suit 

Each wish I here express; 

If he should say, — Will you have me? 

I'll very soon say — Yes! ⁠

 

"
"









Was she of spirit race, or was she one


Of earth's least earthly daughters, one to whom


A gift of loveliness and soul is given,


Only to make them wretched?



There is an antique gem, on which her brow


Retains its graven beauty even now.


Her hair is braided, but one curl behind


Floats as enamour'd of the summer wind;


The rest is simple. Is she not too fair


Even to think of maiden's sweetest care?


The mouth and brow are contrasts. One so fraught


With pride, the melancholy pride of thought


Conscious of power, and yet forced to know


How little way such power as that can go;


Regretting, while too proud of the fine mind,


Which raises but to part it from its kind:


But the sweet mouth had nothing of all this;


It was a mouth the rose had lean'd to kiss


For her young sister, telling, now though mute,


How soft an echo it was to the lute.


The one spoke genius, in its high revealing;


The other smiled a woman's gentle feeling.


It was a lovely face: the Greek outline


Flowing, yet delicate and feminine;


The glorious lightning of the kindled eye,


Raised, as it communed with its native sky.


A lovely face the spirit's fitting shrine;


The one almost, the other quite divine.









My hand is on the lyre which never more

With its sweet commerce, like a bosom friend,

Will share the deeper thoughts which I could trust

Only to music and to solitude.

It is the very grove, the olive grove,

Where first I laid my laurel crown aside,

And bathed my fever'd brow in the cold stream;

As if that I could wash away the fire

Which from that moment kindled in my heart.

I well remember how I flung myself,

Like a young goddess, on a purple cloud

Of light and odour — the rich violets

Were so ethereal in bloom and breath:

And I — I felt immortal, for my brain

Was drunk and mad with its first draught of fame.

'Tis strange there was one only cypress tree,

And then, as now, I lay beneath its shade.

The night had seen me pace my lonely room,

Clasping the lyre I had no heart to wake,

Impatient for the day: yet its first dawn

Came cold as death; for every pulse sank down,

Until the very presence of my hope

Became to me a fear.    The sun rose up;

I stood alone 'mid thousands: but I felt

Mine inspiration; and, as the last sweep

Of my song died away amid the hills,

My heart reverb'rated the shout which bore

To the blue mountains and the distant heavenErinna's name, and on my bended knee,

Olympus, I received thy laurel crown.

 

   And twice new birth of violets have sprung,

Since they were first my pillow, since I sought

In the deep silence of the olive grove

The dreamy happiness which solitude

Brings to the soul o'erfill'd with its delight:

For I was like some young and sudden heir

Of a rich palace heap'd with gems and gold,

Whose pleasure doubles as he sums his wealth

And forms a thousand plans of festival;

Such were my myriad visions of delight.

The lute, which hitherto in Delphian shades

Had been my twilight's solitary joy,

Would henceforth be a sweet and breathing bond

Between me and my kind.    Orphan unloved,

I had been lonely from my childhood's hour,

Childhood whose very happiness is love:

But that was over now; my lyre would be

My own heart's true interpreter, and those

To whom my song was dear, would they not bless

The hand that waken'd it? I should be loved

For the so gentle sake of those soft chords

Which mingled others' feelings with mine own.

 

    Vow'd I that song to meek and gentle thoughts,

To tales that told of sorrow and of love,

To all our nature's finest touches, all

That wakens sympathy: and I should be

Alone no longer; every wind that bore,

And every lip that breathed one strain of mine,

Henceforth partake in all my joy and grief.

Oh! glorious is the gifted poet's lot,

And touching more than glorious: 'tis to be

Companion of the heart's least earthly hour;

The voice of love and sadness, calling forth

Tears from their silent fountain: 'tis to have

Share in all nature's loveliness; giving flowers

A life as sweet, more lasting than their own;

And catching from green wood and lofty pine

Language mysterious as musical;

Making the thoughts, which else had only been

Like colours on the morning's earliest hour,

Immortal, and worth immortality;

Yielding the hero that eternal name

For which he fought; making the patriot's deed

A stirring record for long after-time;

Cherishing tender thoughts, which else had pass'd

Away like tears; and saving the loved dead

From death's worst part — its deep forgetfulness.

 

From the first moment when a falling leaf,

Or opening bud, or streak of rose-touch'd sky,

Waken'd in me the flush and flow of song,

I gave my soul entire unto the gift

I deem'd mine own, direct from heaven; it was

The hope, the bliss, the energy of life;

I had no hope that dwelt not with my lyre,

No bliss whose being grew not from my lyre,

No energy undevoted to my lyre.

It was my other self that had a power;

Mine, but o'er which I had not a control.

At times it was not with me, and I felt

A wonder how it ever had been mine:

And then a word, a look of loveliness,

A tone of music, call'd it into life;

A song came gushing, like the natural tears,

To check whose current does not rest with us.

 

    Had I lived ever in the savage woods,

Or in some distant island, which the sea

With wind and wave guards in deep loneliness;

Had my eye never on the beauty dwelt

Of human face, and my ear never drank

The music of a human voice; I feel

My spirit would have pour'd itself in song,

Have learn'd a language from the rustling leaves,

The singing of the birds, and of the tide.

Perchance, then, happy had I never known

Another thought could be attach'd to song

Than of its own delight.    Oh! let me pause

Over this earlier period, when my heart

Mingled its being with its pleasures, fill'd

With rich enthusiasm, which once flung

Its purple colouring o'er all things of earth,

And without which our utmost power of thought

But sharpens arrows that will drink our blood.

Like woman's soothing influence o'er man

Enthusiasm is upon the mind;

Softening and beautifying that which is

Too harsh and sullen in itself.    How much

I loved the painter's glorious art, which forms

A world like, but more beautiful than, this;

Just catching nature in her happiest mood!

How drank I in fine poetry, which makes

The hearing passionate, fill'd with memories

Which steal from out the past like rays from clouds!

And then the sweet songs of my native vale,

Whose sweetness and whose softness call'd to mind

The perfume of the flowers, the purity

Of the blue sky; oh, how they stirr'd my soul! —

Amid the many golden gifts which heaven

Has left, like portions of its light, on earth

None hath such influence as music hath.

The painter's hues stand visible before us

In power and beauty; we can trace the thoughts

Which are the workings of the poet's mind:

But music is a mystery, and viewless

Even when present, and is less man's act,

And less within his order; for the hand

That can call forth the tones, yet cannot tell

Whither they go, or if they live or die,

When floated once beyond his feeble ear;

And then, as if it were an unreal thing,

The wind will sweep from the neglected strings

As rich a swell as ever minstrel drew.

 

    A poet's word, a painter's touch, will reach

The innermost recesses of the heart,

Making the pulses throb in unison

With joy or grief, which we can analyse;

There is the cause for pleasure and for pain:

But music moves us, and we know not why;

We feel the tears, but cannot trace their source.

Is it the language of some other state,

Born of its memory?    For what can wake

The soul's strong instinct of another world,

Like music?    Well with sadness doth it suit

To hear the melancholy sounds decay,

And think (for thoughts are life's great human links,

And mingle with our feelings) even so

Will the heart's wildest pulses sink to rest.

 

    How have I loved, when the red evening fill'd

Our temple with its glory, first, to gaze

On the strange contrast of the crimson air,

Lighted as if with passion, and flung back,

From silver vase and tripod rich with gems,

To the pale statues round, where human life

Was not, but beauty was, which seem'd to have

Apart existence from humanity:

Then, to go forth where the tall waving pines

Seem'd as behind them roll'd a golden sea

Immortal and eternal; and the boughs,

That darkly swept between me and its light,

Were fitting emblems of the worldly cares

That are the boundary between us and heaven;

Meanwhile, the wind, a wilful messenger

Lingering amid the flowers on his way,

At intervals swept past in melody,

The lutes and voices of the choral hymn

Contending with the rose-breath on his wing!

Perhaps it is these pleasures' chiefest charm,

They are so indefinable, so vague.

From earliest childhood all too well aware

Of the uncertain nature of our joys,

It is delicious to enjoy, yet know

No after-consequence will be to weep.

Pride misers with enjoyment, when we have

Delight in things that are but of the mind:

But half humility when we partake

Pleasures that are half wants, the spirit pines

And struggles in its fetters, and disdains

The low base clay to which it is allied.

But here our rapture raises us: we feel

What glorious power is given to man, and find

Our nature's nobleness and attributes,

Whose heaven is intellect; and we are proud

To think how we can love those things of earth

Which are least earthly; and the soul grows pure

In this high communing, and more divine.

 

    This time of dreaming happiness pass'd by,

Another spirit was within my heart;

I drank the maddening cup of praise, which grew

Henceforth the fountain of my life; I lived

Only in others' breath; a word, a look,

Were of all influence on my destiny:

If praise they spoke, 'twas sunlight to my soul;

Or censure, it was like the scorpion's sting.

 

And yet a darker lesson was to learn —

The hollowness of each: that praise, which is

But base exchange of flattery; that blame,

Given by cautious coldness, which still deems

'Tis safest to depress; that mockery,

Flinging shafts but to show its own keen aim;

That carelessness, whose very censure's chance;

And, worst of all, the earthly judgment pass'd

By minds whose native clay is unredeem'd

By aught of heaven, whose every thought falls foul

Plague-spot on beauty which they cannot feel,

Tainting all that it touches with itself.

O dream of fame, what hast thou been to me

But the destroyer of life's calm content!

I feel so more than ever, that thy sway

Is weaken'd over me. Once I could find

A deep and dangerous delight in thee;

But that is gone.    I am too much awake.

Light has burst o'er me, but not morning's light;

'Tis such light as will burst upon the tomb,

When all but judgment's over.    Can it be,

That these fine impulses, these lofty thoughts,

Burning with their own beauty, are but given

To make me the low slave of vanity,

Heartless and humbled?     O my own sweet power,

Surely thy songs are made for more than this!

What a worst waste of feeling and of life

Have been the imprints of my roll of time,

Too much, too long!    To what use have I turn'd

The golden gifts in which I pride myself?

They are profaned; with their pure ore I made

A temple resting only on the breath

Of heedless worshippers.    Alas! that ever

Praise should have been what it has been to me —

The opiate of my heart.    Yet I have dream'd

Of things which cannot be; the bright, the pure,

That all of which the heart may only dream;

And I have mused upon my gift of song,

And deeply felt its beauty, and disdain'd

The pettiness of praise to which at times

My soul has bow'd; and I have scorn'd myself

For that my cheek could burn, my pulses beat

At idle words.    And yet it is in vain

For the full heart to press back every throb

Wholly upon itself.    Ay, fair as are

The visions of a poet's solitude,

There must be something more for happiness;

They seek communion.    It had seem'd to me

A miser's selfishness, had I not sought

To share with others those impassion'd thoughts,

Like light, or hope, or love, in their effects.

When I have watch'd the stars write on the sky

In characters of light, have seen the moon

Come like veiled priestess from the east,

While, like a hymn, the wind swell'd on mine ear,

Telling soft tidings of eve's thousand flowers,

Has it not been the transport of my lute

To find its best delight in sympathy?

Alas! the idols which our hopes set up,

They are Chaldean ones, half gold, half clay;

We trust we are deceived, we hope, we fear,

Alike without foundation; day by day

Some new illusion is destroyed, and life

Gets cold and colder on towards its close.

Just like the years which make it, some are check'd

By sudden blights in spring; some are dried up

By fiery summers; others waste away

In calm monotony of quiet skies,

And peradventure these may be the best:

They know no hurricanes, no floods that sweep

As a God's vengeance were upon each wave;

But then they have no ruby fruits, no flowers

Shining in purple, and no lighted mines

Of gold and diamond.    Which is the best, —

Beauty and glory, in a southern clime,

Mingled with thunder, tempest; or the calm

Of skies that scarcely change, which, at the least,

If much of shine they have not, have no storms?

I know not: but I know fair earth or sky

Are self-consuming in their loveliness,

And the too radiant sun and fertile soil

In their luxuriance run themselves to waste,

And the green valley and the silver stream

Become a sandy desert.    O! the mind,

Too vivid in its lighted energies,

May read its fate in sunny Araby.

How lives its beauty in each Eastern tale,

Its growth of spices, and its groves of balm!

They are exhausted; and what is it now?

A wild and burning wilderness.    Alas!

For such similitude. Too much this is

The fate of this world's loveliest and best.

 

    Is there not a far people, who possess

Mysterious oracles of olden time,

Who say that this earth labours with a curse,

That it is fallen from its first estate,

And is now but the shade of what it was?

I do believe the tale.    I feel its truth

In my vain aspirations, in the dreams

That are revealings of another world,

More pure, more perfect than our weary one,

Where day is darkness to the starry soul.

 

    O heart of mine! my once sweet paradise

Of love and hope! how changed thou art to me!

I cannot count thy changes: thou hast lost

Interest in the once idols of thy being;

They have departed, even as if wings

Had borne away their morning; they have left

Weariness, turning pleasure into pain,

And too sure knowledge of their hollowness.

 

    And that too is gone from me; that which was

My solitude's delight!    I can no more

Make real existence of a shadowy world.

Time was, the poet's song, the ancient tale,

Were to me fountains of deep happiness,

For they grew visible in my lonely hours,

As things in which I had a deed and part;

Their actual presence had not been more true:

But these are bubbling sparkles, that are found

But at the spring's first source.    Ah! years may bring

The mind to its perfection, but no more

Will those young visions live in their own light;

Life's troubles stir life's waters all too much,

Passions chase fancies, and though still we dream,

The colouring is from reality.

 

    Farewell, my lyre! thou hast not been to me

All I once hoped.    What is the gift of mind,

But as a barrier to so much that makes

Our life endurable, — companionship,

Mingling affection, calm and gentle peace,

Till the vex'd spirit seals with discontent

A league of sorrow and of vanity,

Built on a future which will never be!

 

    And yet I would resign the praise that now

Makes my cheek crimson, and my pulses beat,

Could I but deem that when my hand is cold,

And my lip passionless, my songs would be

Number'd mid the young poet's first delights;

Read by the dark-eyed maiden in an hour

Of moonlight, till her cheek shone with its tears;

And murmur'd by the lover when his suit

Calls upon poetry to breathe of love.

I do not hope a sunshine burst of fame,

My lyre asks but a wreath of fragile flowers.

I have told passionate tales of breaking hearts,

Of young cheeks fading even before the rose;

My songs have been the mournful history

Of woman's tenderness and woman's tears;

I have touch'd but the spirit's gentlest chords, —

Surely the fittest for my maiden hand; —

And in their truth my immortality.

 

    Thou lovely and lone star, whose silver light,

Like music o'er the waters, steals along

The soften'd atmosphere; pale star, to thee

I dedicate the lyre, whose influence

I would have sink upon the heart like thine.

 

    In such an hour as this, the bosom turns

Back to its early feelings; man forgets

His stern ambition and his worldly cares,

And woman loathes the petty vanities

That mar her nature's beauty; like the dew,

Shedding its sweetness o'er the sleeping flowers

Till all their morning freshness is revived,

Kindly affections, sad but yet sweet thoughts,

Melt the cold eyes, long, long unused to weep.

O lute of mine, that I shall wake no more!

Such tearful music, linger on thy strings,

Consecrate unto sorrow and to love;

Thy truth, thy tenderness, be all thy fame!

 

"
"

by going you have to be and

seek it

out

 

said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time

explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it

the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or

ripples in the pond sufficient

in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—

 

faithless as a class of examples

i found new objects swimming blankly in a common

sense, by going alone to listen

                                                to them

                         in the night

            light of their pool—

 

                                     to begin with life or stars

                                                              the spring as source or

                                                      season

                                         when to start—i love what you

                        said about the birds

                        as distance is required for attraction

                        & force keeps its distinctions

                        in a tall hull

                        called law—

                        clever in the style of depth in a painting

                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this

                        of fancy, pity, and devising,

                        wherefore as it is at the right door

                        make it language or rejoice

                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts

                        & short of the occasion

                        just a frequent mist of atoms

                        all touching in the arms

                        like an error in the wish

 

"
"

Paradise with a thousand stings, she replies.

Deep blue and blazing sky. Incessant cicadas,

scuttle of bug and roach. Fleas, mosquitos,

the threat of scorpions. Men leaning on doorposts,

crowding the bar. Smoking, drinking,

laughing descendants of slaves. Fire coral burns,

reef-edge barracudas. Truly lovely.

Matriarchal, she says, women with eight children

by many different men. The men would leave

as the spirit took them. I want

to know all the forces one can call spirit.

Tall, swaying fronds of the sugar cane fields.

Distant roar heralding a downpour. Snapping turtles.

Nearby shanty town, she says,

streets full of rubbish, rats in the gutter.

I admired the colonial-style homes, she says.

Colonial, I say.

Separate servant quarters and grounds

filled with samaan trees, the balconies overflowing

with hot-colored orchids and the locusts drawn close

by the palatial lights, colorful and clawing,

their hooks sunk deep into the bare skin of a sweating back.

"
"

I

That is no country for old men. The young

In one another's arms, birds in the trees,

—Those dying generations—at their song,

The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded seas,

Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long

Whatever is begotten, born, and dies.

Caught in that sensual music all neglect

Monuments of unageing intellect.

II

An aged man is but a paltry thing,

A tattered coat upon a stick, unless

Soul clap its hands and sing, and louder sing

For every tatter in its mortal dress,

Nor is there singing school but studying

Monuments of its own magnificence;

And therefore I have sailed the seas and come

To the holy city of Byzantium.

III

O sages standing in God's holy fire

As in the gold mosaic of a wall,

Come from the holy fire, perne in a gyre,

And be the singing-masters of my soul.

Consume my heart away; sick with desire

And fastened to a dying animal

It knows not what it is; and gather me

Into the artifice of eternity.

IV

Once out of nature I shall never take

My bodily form from any natural thing,

But such a form as Grecian goldsmiths make

Of hammered gold and gold enamelling

To keep a drowsy Emperor awake;

Or set upon a golden bough to sing

To lords and ladies of Byzantium

Of what is past, or passing, or to come.

"
"

I

I walk through the long schoolroom questioning;

A kind old nun in a white hood replies;

The children learn to cipher and to sing,

To study reading-books and history,

To cut and sew, be neat in everything

In the best modern way—the children's eyes

In momentary wonder stare upon

A sixty-year-old smiling public man.

II

I dream of a Ledaean body, bent

Above a sinking fire, a tale that she

Told of a harsh reproof, or trivial event

That changed some childish day to tragedy—

Told, and it seemed that our two natures blent

Into a sphere from youthful sympathy,

Or else, to alter Plato's parable,

Into the yolk and white of the one shell.

III

And thinking of that fit of grief or rage

I look upon one child or t'other there

And wonder if she stood so at that age—

For even daughters of the swan can share

Something of every paddler's heritage—

And had that colour upon cheek or hair,

And thereupon my heart is driven wild:

She stands before me as a living child.

IV

Her present image floats into the mind—

Did Quattrocento finger fashion it

Hollow of cheek as though it drank the wind

And took a mess of shadows for its meat?

And I though never of Ledaean kind

Had pretty plumage once—enough of that,

Better to smile on all that smile, and show

There is a comfortable kind of old scarecrow.

V

What youthful mother, a shape upon her lap

Honey of generation had betrayed,

And that must sleep, shriek, struggle to escape

As recollection or the drug decide,

Would think her son, did she but see that shape

With sixty or more winters on its head,

A compensation for the pang of his birth,

Or the uncertainty of his setting forth?

VI

Plato thought nature but a spume that plays

Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;

Solider Aristotle played the taws

Upon the bottom of a king of kings;

World-famous golden-thighed Pythagoras

Fingered upon a fiddle-stick or strings

What a star sang and careless Muses heard:

Old clothes upon old sticks to scare a bird.

VII

Both nuns and mothers worship images,

But those the candles light are not as those

That animate a mother's reveries,

But keep a marble or a bronze repose.

And yet they too break hearts—O Presences

That passion, piety or affection knows,

And that all heavenly glory symbolise—

O self-born mockers of man's enterprise;

VIII

Labour is blossoming or dancing where

The body is not bruised to pleasure soul,

Nor beauty born out of its own despair,

Nor blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.

O chestnut tree, great rooted blossomer,

Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?

O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,

How can we know the dancer from the dance?

"
"

IMy Soul. I summon to the winding ancient stair;

   Set all your mind upon the steep ascent,

   Upon the broken, crumbling battlement,

   Upon the breathless starlit air,

   Upon the star that marks the hidden pole;

   Fix every wandering thought upon

   That quarter where all thought is done:

   Who can distinguish darkness from the soul?My Self. The consecrated blade upon my knees

   Is Sato's ancient blade, still as it was,

   Still razor-keen, still like a looking-glass

   Unspotted by the centuries;

   That flowering, silken, old embroidery, torn

   From some court-lady's dress and round

   The wooden scabbard bound and wound,

   Can, tattered, still protect, faded adorn.My Soul. Why should the imagination of a man

   Long past his prime remember things that are

   Emblematical of love and war?

   Think of ancestral night that can,

   If but imagination scorn the earth

   And intellect its wandering

   To this and that and t'other thing,

   Deliver from the crime of death and birth.My Self. Montashigi, third of his family, fashioned it

   Five hundred years ago, about it lie

   Flowers from I know not what embroidery—

   Heart's purple—and all these I set

   For emblems of the day against the tower

   Emblematical of the night,

   And claim as by a soldier's right

   A charter to commit the crime once more.My Soul. Such fullness in that quarter overflows

   And falls into the basin of the mind

   That man is stricken deaf and dumb and blind,

   For intellect no longer knows   Is from the Ought, or Knower from the Known—

   That is to say, ascends to Heaven;

   Only the dead can be forgiven;

   But when I think of that my tongue's a stone.

IIMy Self. A living man is blind and drinks his drop.

What matter if the ditches are impure?

What matter if I live it all once more?

Endure that toil of growing up;

The ignominy of boyhood; the distress

Of boyhood changing into man;

The unfinished man and his pain

Brought face to face with his own clumsiness;

The finished man among his enemies?—

How in the name of Heaven can he escape

That defiling and disfigured shape

The mirror of malicious eyes

Casts upon his eyes until at last

He thinks that shape must be his shape?

And what's the good of an escape

If honour find him in the wintry blast?

I am content to live it all again

And yet again, if it be life to pitch

Into the frog-spawn of a blind man's ditch,

A blind man battering blind men;

Or into that most fecund ditch of all,

The folly that man does

Or must suffer, if he woos

A proud woman not kindred of his soul.

I am content to follow to its source

Every event in action or in thought;

Measure the lot; forgive myself the lot!

When such as I cast out remorse

So great a sweetness flows into the breast

We must laugh and we must sing,

We are blest by everything,

Everything we look upon is blest.

"
"

I met the Bishop on the road

And much said he and I.

`Those breasts are flat and fallen now

Those veins must soon be dry;

Live in a heavenly mansion,

Not in some foul sty.'

`Fair and foul are near of kin,

And fair needs foul,' I cried.

'My friends are gone, but that's a truth

Nor grave nor bed denied,

Learned in bodily lowliness

And in the heart's pride.

`A woman can be proud and stiff

When on love intent;

But Love has pitched his mansion in

The place of excrement;

For nothing can be sole or whole

That has not been rent.'

"
"

The unpurged images of day recede;

The Emperor's drunken soldiery are abed;

Night resonance recedes, night-walkers' song

After great cathedral gong;

A starlit or a moonlit dome disdains

All that man is,

All mere complexities,

The fury and the mire of human veins.

Before me floats an image, man or shade,

Shade more than man, more image than a shade;

For Hades' bobbin bound in mummy-cloth

May unwind the winding path;

A mouth that has no moisture and no breath

Breathless mouths may summon;

I hail the superhuman;

I call it death-in-life and life-in-death.

Miracle, bird or golden handiwork,

More miracle than bird or handiwork,

Planted on the starlit golden bough,

Can like the cocks of Hades crow,

Or, by the moon embittered, scorn aloud

In glory of changeless metal

Common bird or petal

And all complexities of mire or blood.

At midnight on the Emperor's pavement flit

Flames that no faggot feeds, nor steel has lit,

Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame,

Where blood-begotten spirits come

And all complexities of fury leave,

Dying into a dance,

An agony of trance,

An agony of flame that cannot singe a sleeve.

Astraddle on the dolphin's mire and blood,

Spirit after spirit! The smithies break the flood,

The golden smithies of the Emperor!

Marbles of the dancing floor

Break bitter furies of complexity,

Those images that yet

Fresh images beget,

That dolphin-torn, that gong-tormented sea.

"
"







(for Harry Clifton)







I have heard that hysterical women say

They are sick of the palette and fiddle-bow,

Of poets that are always gay,

For everybody knows or else should know

That if nothing drastic is done

Aeroplane and Zeppelin will come out,

Pitch like King Billy bomb-balls in

Until the town lie beaten flat.

All perform their tragic play,

There struts Hamlet, there is Lear,

That's Ophelia, that Cordelia;

Yet they, should the last scene be there,

The great stage curtain about to drop,

If worthy their prominent part in the play,

Do not break up their lines to weep.

They know that Hamlet and Lear are gay;

Gaiety transfiguring all that dread.

All men have aimed at, found and lost;

Black out; Heaven blazing into the head:

Tragedy wrought to its uttermost.

Though Hamlet rambles and Lear rages,

And all the drop scenes drop at once

Upon a hundred thousand stages,

It cannot grow by an inch or an ounce.

On their own feet they came, or on shipboard,

Camel-back, horse-back, ass-back, mule-back,

Old civilisations put to the sword.

Then they and their wisdom went to rack:

No handiwork of Callimachus

Who handled marble as if it were bronze,

Made draperies that seemed to rise

When sea-wind swept the corner, stands;

His long lamp chimney shaped like the stem

Of a slender palm, stood but a day;

All things fall and are built again

And those that build them again are gay.

Two Chinamen, behind them a third,

Are carved in Lapis Lazuli,

Over them flies a long-legged bird

A symbol of longevity;

The third, doubtless a serving-man,

Carries a musical instrument.

Every discolouration of the stone,

Every accidental crack or dent

Seems a water-course or an avalanche,

Or lofty slope where it still snows

Though doubtless plum or cherry-branch

Sweetens the little half-way house

Those Chinamen climb towards, and I

Delight to imagine them seated there;

There, on the mountain and the sky,

On all the tragic scene they stare.

One asks for mournful melodies;

Accomplished fingers begin to play.

Their eyes mid many wrinkles, their eyes,

Their ancient, glittering eyes, are gay.

"
"

I

Swear by what the Sages spoke   

Round the Mareotic Lake

That the Witch of Atlas knew,   

Spoke and set the cocks a-crow.

Swear by those horsemen, by those women,   

Complexion and form prove superhuman,   

That pale, long visaged company

That airs an immortality

Completeness of their passions won;   

Now they ride the wintry dawn

Where Ben Bulben sets the scene.

Here's the gist of what they mean.   

II

Many times man lives and dies   

Between his two eternities,   

That of race and that of soul,   

And ancient Ireland knew it all.   

Whether man dies in his bed   

Or the rifle knocks him dead,

A brief parting from those dear   

Is the worst man has to fear.   

Though grave-diggers' toil is long,   

Sharp their spades, their muscle strong,   

They but thrust their buried men   

Back in the human mind again.

III

You that Mitchel's prayer have heard   

`Send war in our time, O Lord!'   

Know that when all words are said   

And a man is fighting mad,   

Something drops from eyes long blind   

He completes his partial mind,   

For an instant stands at ease,   

Laughs aloud, his heart at peace,   

Even the wisest man grows tense   

With some sort of violence   

Before he can accomplish fate   

Know his work or choose his mate.

IV

Poet and sculptor do the work   

Nor let the modish painter shirk   

What his great forefathers did,   

Bring the soul of man to God,   

Make him fill the cradles right.

Measurement began our might:   

Forms a stark Egyptian thought,   

Forms that gentler Phidias wrought.

Michael Angelo left a proof   

On the Sistine Chapel roof,   

Where but half-awakened Adam   

Can disturb globe-trotting Madam   

Till her bowels are in heat,   

Proof that there's a purpose set   

Before the secret working mind:   

Profane perfection of mankind.

Quattrocento put in paint,

On backgrounds for a God or Saint,   

Gardens where a soul's at ease;   

Where everything that meets the eye

Flowers and grass and cloudless sky   

Resemble forms that are, or seem   

When sleepers wake and yet still dream,   

And when it's vanished still declare,   

With only bed and bedstead there,   

That Heavens had opened.

                                        Gyres run on;

When that greater dream had gone   

Calvert and Wilson, Blake and Claude   

Prepared a rest for the people of God,   

Palmer's phrase, but after that

Confusion fell upon our thought.

V

Irish poets learn your trade   

Sing whatever is well made,   

Scorn the sort now growing up   

All out of shape from toe to top,

Their unremembering hearts and heads   

Base-born products of base beds.   

Sing the peasantry, and then   

Hard-riding country gentlemen,   

The holiness of monks, and after   

Porter-drinkers' randy laughter;   

Sing the lords and ladies gay   

That were beaten into the clay   

Through seven heroic centuries;   

Cast your mind on other days   

That we in coming days may be   

Still the indomitable Irishry.

VI

Under bare Ben Bulben's head

In Drumcliff churchyard Yeats is laid,   

An ancestor was rector there

Long years ago; a church stands near,

By the road an ancient Cross.

No marble, no conventional phrase,   

On limestone quarried near the spot   

By his command these words are cut:

               Cast a cold eye   

               On life, on death.   

               Horseman, pass by!

"
"

I

I sought a theme and sought for it in vain,

I sought it daily for six weeks or so.

Maybe at last being but a broken man

I must be satisfied with my heart, although

Winter and summer till old age began

My circus animals were all on show,

Those stilted boys, that burnished chariot,

Lion and woman and the Lord knows what.

II

What can I but enumerate old themes,

First that sea-rider Oisin led by the nose

Through three enchanted islands, allegorical dreams,

Vain gaiety, vain battle, vain repose,

Themes of the embittered heart, or so it seems,

That might adorn old songs or courtly shows;

But what cared I that set him on to ride,

I, starved for the bosom of his fairy bride.

And then a counter-truth filled out its play,

`The Countess Cathleen' was the name I gave it,

She, pity-crazed, had given her soul away

But masterful Heaven had intervened to save it.

I thought my dear must her own soul destroy

So did fanaticism and hate enslave it,

And this brought forth a dream and soon enough

This dream itself had all my thought and love.

And when the Fool and Blind Man stole the bread

Cuchulain fought the ungovernable sea;

Heart mysteries there, and yet when all is said

It was the dream itself enchanted me:

Character isolated by a deed

To engross the present and dominate memory.

Players and painted stage took all my love

And not those things that they were emblems of.

III

Those masterful images because complete

Grew in pure mind but out of what began?

A mound of refuse or the sweepings of a street,

Old kettles, old bottles, and a broken can,

Old iron, old bones, old rags, that raving slut

Who keeps the till. Now that my ladder's gone

I must lie down where all the ladders start

In the foul rag and bone shop of the heart.

"
"

Fle fro the pres, and dwelle with sothefastnesse,

Suffise thin owen thing, thei it be smal;

For hord hath hate, and clymbyng tykelnesse,

Prees hath envye, and wele blent overal.

Savour no more thanne the byhove schal;

Reule weel thiself, that other folk canst reede;

And trouthe schal delyvere, it is no drede.

      Tempest the nought al croked to redresse,

In trust of hire that tourneth as a bal.

Myche wele stant in litel besynesse;

Bywar therfore to spurne ayeyns an al;

Stryve not as doth the crokke with the wal.

Daunte thiself, that dauntest otheres dede;

And trouthe shal delyvere, it is no drede.

      That the is sent, receyve in buxumnesse;

The wrestlyng for the worlde axeth a fal.

Here is non home, here nys but wyldernesse.

Forth, pylgryme, forth! forth, beste, out of thi stal!

Know thi contré! loke up! thonk God of al!

Hold the heye weye, and lat thi gost the lede;

And trouthe shal delyvere, it is no drede.

      Therfore, thou Vache, leve thine olde wrechednesse;

Unto the world leve now to be thral.

Crie hym mercy, that of hys hie godnesse

Made the of nought, and in espec{.i}al

Draw unto hym, and pray in general

For the, and eke for other, hevenelyche mede;

And trouthe schal delyvere, it is no drede.

"
"

Fair is my love, and cruel as she's fair:Her brow shades frowns although her eyes are sunny,Her smiles are lightning though her pride despair,And her disdains are gall, her favours honey;A modest maid, deck'd with a blush of honour,Whose feet do tread green paths of youth and love,The wonder of all eyes that look upon her:Sacred on earth, design'd a saint above.Chastity and beauty, which were deadly foes,Live reconciled friends within her brow;And had she pity to conjoin with those,Then who had heard the plaints I utter now?For had she not been fair and thus unkind,My muse had slept, and none had known my mind.

"
"

Look, Delia, how we 'steem the half-blown rose,The image of thy blush and summer's honour,Whilst in her tender green she doth encloseThat pure sweet beauty time bestows upon her.No sooner spreads her glory in the airBut straight her full-blown pride is in declining;She then is scorn'd that late adorn'd the fair:So clouds thy beauty after fairest shining.No April can revive thy wither'd flowers,Whose blooming grace adorns thy beauty now;Swift speedy time, feather'd with flying hours,Dissolves the beauty of the fairest brow.O let not then such riches waste in vain,But love whilst that thou mayst be lov'd again.

"
"

Look, Delia, how w' esteem the half-blown rose,The image of thy blush and summer's honour,Whilst yet her tender bud doth undiscloseThat full of beauty Time bestows upon her.No sooner spreads her glory in the airBut straight her wide-blown pomp comes to decline;She then is scorn'd that late adorn'd the fair;So fade the roses of those cheeks of thine.No April can revive thy wither'd flowersWhose springing grace adorns thy glory now;Swift speedy Time, feather'd with flying hours,Dissolves the beauty of the fairest brow.Then do not thou such treasure waste in vain,But love now, whilst thou mayst be lov'd again.

"
"

When men shall find thy flower, thy glory, pass,And thou with careful brow sitting aloneReceived hast this message from thy glass,That tells thee truth and says that all is gone:Fresh shalt thou see in me the wounds thou madest,Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining;I that have lov'd thee thus before thou fadest,My faith shall wax when thou art in thy waning.The world shall find this miracle in me,That fire can burn when all the matter's spent;Then what my faith hath been thyself shall see,And that thou wast unkind thou mayst repent.Thou mayst repent that thou hast scorn'd my tears,When winter snows upon thy golden hairs.

"
"

Care-charmer Sleep, son of the sable Night, Brother to Death, in silent darkness born: Relieve my languish, and restore the light, With dark forgetting of my cares, return; And let the day be time enough to mourn The shipwreck of my ill-adventur'd youth: Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn, Without the torment of the night's untruth. Cease dreams, th' imagery of our day-desires, To model forth the passions of the morrow; Never let rising sun approve you liars, To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow. Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain; And never wake to feel the day's disdain.

"
"

Let others sing of knights and paladinsIn aged accents and untimely words;Paint shadows in imaginary linesWhich well the reach of their high wits records:But I must sing of thee, and those fair eyesAuthentic shall my verse in time to come,When yet th' unborn shall say, “Lo where she liesWhose beauty made him speak that else was dumb.”These are the arks, the trophies I erect,That fortify thy name against old age;And these thy sacred virtues must protectAgainst the dark, and time's consuming rage.Though th' error of my youth they shall discover,Suffice they show I liv'd and was thy lover.

"
"

Calling to mind since first my love begun,Th' incertain times oft varying in their course,How things still unexpectedly have run,As t' please the fates by their resistless force:Lastly, mine eyes amazedly have seenEssex' great fall, Tyrone his peace to gain,The quiet end of that long-living Queen,This King's fair entrance, and our peace with Spain,We and the Dutch at length ourselves to sever:Thus the world doth and evermore shall reel.Yet to my goddess am I constant ever,Howe'er blind fortune turn her giddy wheel:Though heaven and earth prove both to me untrue,Yet am I still inviolate to you.

"
"

Clear Ancor, on whose silver-sanded shoreMy soul-shrin'd saint, my fair Idea lies,O blessed brook, whose milk-white swans adoreThy crystal stream, refined by her eyes,Where sweet myrrh-breathing Zephyr in the springGently distils his nectar-dropping showers,Where nightingales in Arden sit and singAmongst the dainty dew-impearled flowers;Say thus, fair brook, when thou shalt see thy queen:Lo, here thy shepherd spent his wand'ring years,And in these shades, dear nymph, he oft hath been,And here to thee he sacrific'd his tears.Fair Arden, thou my Tempe art alone,And thou, sweet Ancor, art my Helicon.

"
"

Into these loves, who but for passion looks,At this first sight here let him lay them byAnd seek elsewhere in turning other books,Which better may his labour satisfy.No far-fetch'd sigh shall ever wound my breast;Love from mine eye a tear shall never wring;Nor in ""Ah me's!"" my whining sonnets drest:A libertine, fantasticly I sing.My verse is the true image of my mind,Ever in motion, still desiring change;And as thus to variety inclin'd,So in all humours sportively I range:My Muse is rightly of the English strain,That cannot long one fashion entertain.

"
"

How many paltry, foolish, painted things,That now in coaches trouble every street,Shall be forgotten, whom no poet sings,Ere they be well wrapp'd in their winding-sheet?Where I to thee eternity shall give,When nothing else remaineth of these days,And queens hereafter shall be glad to liveUpon the alms of thy superfluous praise.Virgins and matrons reading these my rhymesShall be so much delighted with thy story,That they shall grieve they liv'd not in these timesTo have seen thee, their sex's only glory.So shalt thou fly above the vulgar throng,Still to survive in my immortal song.

"
"

An evil spirit, your beauty, haunts me still,Wherewith, alas, I have been long possess'd,Which ceaseth not to tempt me to each ill,Nor gives me once but one poor minute's rest.In me it speaks, whether I sleep or wake;And when by means to drive it out I try,With greater torments then it me doth take,And tortures me in most extremity.Before my face it lays down my despairs,And hastes me on unto a sudden death;Now tempting me to drown myself in tears,And then in sighing to give up my breath.Thus am I still provok'd to every evilBy this good-wicked spirit, sweet angel-devil.

"
"

Methinks I see some crooked mimic jeerAnd tax my muse with this fantastic grace,Turning my papers, asks ""what have we here?""Making withall some filthy antic face.I fear no censure, nor what thou canst say,Nor shall my spirit one jot of vigour lose.Think'st thou my wit shall keep the pack-horse wayThat ev'ry dudgeon low invention goes?Since sonnets thus in bundles are impress'd,And ev'ry drudge doth dull our satiate ear,Think'st thou my love shall in those rags be dress'dThat ev'ry dowdy, ev'ry trull doth wear?Up to my pitch no common judgment flies:I scorn all earthly dung-bred scarabies.

"
"

Dear, why should you command me to my restWhen now the night doth summon all to sleep?Methinks this time becometh lovers best;Night was ordain'd together friends to keep.How happy are all other living thingsWhich, though the day disjoin by sev'ral flight,The quiet ev'ning yet together brings,And each returns unto his love at night!O thou that art so courteous else to all,Why should'st thou, Night, abuse me only thus,That ev'ry creature to his kind dost call,And yet 'tis thou dost only sever us?Well could I wish it would be ever day,If when night comes you bid me go away.

"
"

I that in heill wes and gladnes,

Am trublit now with gret seiknes,

And feblit with infermite;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Our plesance heir is all vane glory,

This fals warld is bot transitory,

The flesche is brukle, the Fend is sle;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

The stait of man dois change and vary,

Now sound, now seik, now blith, now sary,

Now dansand mery, now like to dee;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

No stait in erd heir standis sickir;

As with the wynd wavis the wickir,

Wavis this warldis vanite.

Timor mortis conturbat me.

On to the ded gois all estatis,

Princis, prelotis, and potestatis,

Baith riche and pur of al degre;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He takis the knychtis in to feild,

Anarmit under helme and scheild;

Victour he is at all mellie;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

That strang unmercifull tyrand

Takis, on the moderis breist sowkand,

The bab full of benignite;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He takis the campion in the stour,

The capitane closit in the tour,

The lady in bour full of bewte;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He sparis no lord for his piscence,

Na clerk for his intelligence;

His awfull strak may no man fle;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Art-magicianis, and astrologgis,

Rethoris, logicianis, and theologgis,

Thame helpis no conclusionis sle;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

In medicyne the most practicianis,

Lechis, surrigianis, and phisicianis,

Thame self fra ded may not supple;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

I se that makaris amang the laif

Playis heir ther pageant, syne gois to graif;

Sparit is nocht ther faculte;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He hes done petuously devour,

The noble Chaucer, of makaris flour,

The Monk of Bery, and Gower, all thre;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

The gude Syr Hew of Eglintoun,

And eik Heryot, and Wyntoun,

He hes tane out of this cuntre;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

That scorpion fell hes done infek

Maister Johne Clerk, and Jame Afflek,

Fra balat making and tragidie;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Holland and Barbour he hes berevit;

Allace! that he nocht with us levit

Schir Mungo Lokert of the Le;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Clerk of Tranent eik he has tane,

That maid the Anteris of Gawane;

Schir Gilbert Hay endit hes he;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He hes Blind Hary and Sandy Traill

Slaine with his schour of mortall haill,

Quhilk Patrik Johnestoun myght nocht fle;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He hes reft Merseir his endite,

That did in luf so lifly write,

So schort, so quyk, of sentence hie;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

He hes tane Roull of Aberdene,

And gentill Roull of Corstorphin;

Two bettir fallowis did no man se;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

In Dumfermelyne he hes done roune

With Maister Robert Henrisoun;

Schir Johne the Ros enbrast hes he;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

And he hes now tane, last of aw,

Gud gentill Stobo and Quintyne Schaw,

Of quham all wichtis hes pete:

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Gud Maister Walter Kennedy

In poynt of dede lyis veraly,

Gret reuth it wer that so suld be;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Sen he hes all my brether tane,

He will nocht lat me lif alane,

On forse I man his nyxt pray be;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

Sen for the deid remeid is none,

Best is that we for dede dispone,

Eftir our deid that lif may we;

Timor mortis conturbat me.

"
"

The time you won your town the race We chaired you through the market-place; Man and boy stood cheering by, And home we brought you shoulder-high. To-day, the road all runners come, Shoulder-high we bring you home, And set you at your threshold down, Townsman of a stiller town. Smart lad, to slip betimes away From fields where glory does not stay And early though the laurel grows It withers quicker than the rose. Eyes the shady night has shut Cannot see the record cut, And silence sounds no worse than cheers After earth has stopped the ears: Now you will not swell the rout Of lads that wore their honours out, Runners whom renown outran And the name died before the man. So set, before its echoes fade, The fleet foot on the sill of shade, And hold to the low lintel up The still-defended challenge-cup. And round that early-laurelled head Will flock to gaze the strengthless dead, And find unwithered on its curls The garland briefer than a girl's.

"
"

An uphill path, sun-gleams between the showers,    Where every beam that broke the leaden skyLit other hills with fairer ways than ours;    Some clustered graves where half our memories lie;And one grim Shadow creeping ever nigh:        And this was Life.Wherein we did another's burden seek,    The tired feet we helped upon the road,The hand we gave the weary and the weak,    The miles we lightened one another's load,When, faint to falling, onward yet we strode:        This too was Life.Till, at the upland, as we turned to go    Amid fair meadows, dusky in the night,The mists fell back upon the road below;    Broke on our tired eyes the western light;The very graves were for a moment bright:        And this was Death.

"
"

Hail native language, that by sinews weak Didst move my first endeavouring tongue to speak, And mad'st imperfect words with childish trips, Half unpronounc'd, slide through my infant lips, Driving dumb Silence from the portal door, Where he had mutely sate two years before: Here I salute thee and thy pardon ask, That now I use thee in my latter task: Small loss it is that thence can come unto thee, I know my tongue but little grace can do thee: Thou needst not be ambitious to be first, Believe me I have thither pack'd the worst: And, if it happen as I did forecast, The daintest dishes shall be serv'd up last. I pray thee then deny me not thy aid For this same small neglect that I have made: But haste thee straight to do me once a pleasure, And from thy wardrobe bring thy chiefest treasure; Not those new-fangled toys, and trimming slight Which takes our late fantastics with delight, But cull those richest robes, and gay'st attire Which deepest spirits, and choicest wits desire. I have some naked thoughts that rove about And loudly knock to have their passage out; And weary of their place do only stay Till thou hast deck'd them in thy best array; That so they may without suspect or fears Fly swiftly to this fair assembly's ears. Yet I had rather, if I were to choose, Thy service in some graver subject use, Such as may make thee search thy coffers round, Before thou clothe my fancy in fit sound: Such where the deep transported mind may soar Above the wheeling poles, and at heav'n's door Look in, and see each blissful deity How he before the thunderous throne doth lie, Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings To th'touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings Immortal nectar to her kingly sire; Then passing through the spheres of watchful fire, And misty regions of wide air next under, And hills of snow and lofts of piled thunder, May tell at length how green-ey'd Neptune raves, In heav'n's defiance mustering all his waves; Then sing of secret things that came to pass When beldam Nature in her cradle was; And last of kings and queens and heroes old, Such as the wise Demodocus once told In solemn songs at king Alcinous' feast, While sad Ulysses' soul and all the rest Are held with his melodious harmony In willing chains and sweet captivity.

"
"

I dug, beneath the cypress shade,    What well might seem an elfin's grave;And every pledge in earth I laid,    That erst thy false affection gave.I pressed them down the sod beneath;    I placed one mossy stone above;And twined the rose's fading wreath    Around the sepulchre of love.Frail as thy love, the flowers were dead,    Ere yet the evening sun was set:But years shall see the cypress spread,    Immutable as my regret.

"
"

Seamen three! What men be ye?Gotham's three wise men we be.Whither in your bowl so free?To rake the moon from out the sea.The bowl goes trim. The moon doth shine.And our ballast is old wine;And your ballast is old wine.Who art thou, so fast adrift?I am he they call Old Care.Here on board we will thee lift.No: I may not enter there.Wherefore so? 'Tis Jove's decree,In a bowl Care may not be;In a bowl Care may not be.Fear ye not the waves that roll?No: in charmed bowl we swim.What the charm that floats the bowl?Water may not pass the brim.The bowl goes trim. The moon doth shine.And our ballast is old wine;And your ballast is old wine.

"
"

The mountain sheep are sweeter,But the valley sheep are fatter;We therefore deemed it meeterTo carry off the latter.We made an expedition;We met a host, and quelled it;We forced a strong position,And killed the men who held it.On Dyfed's richest valley,Where herds of kine were browsing,We made a mighty sally,To furnish our carousing.Fierce warriors rushed to meet us;We met them, and o'erthrew them:They struggled hard to beat us;But we conquered them, and slew them.As we drove our prize at leisure,The king marched forth to catch us:His rage surpassed all measure,But his people could not match us.He fled to his hall-pillars;And, ere our force we led off,Some sacked his house and cellars,While others cut his head off.We there, in strife bewild'ring,Spilt blood enough to swim in:We orphaned many children,And widowed many women.The eagles and the ravensWe glutted with our foemen;The heroes and the cravens,The spearmen and the bowmen.We brought away from battle,And much their land bemoaned them,Two thousand head of cattle,And the head of him who owned them:Ednyfed, king of Dyfed,His head was borne before us;His wine and beasts supplied our feasts,And his overthrow, our chorus.

"
"

I have a rendezvous with DeathAt some disputed barricade,When Spring comes back with rustling shadeAnd apple-blossoms fill the air—I have a rendezvous with DeathWhen Spring brings back blue days and fair.It may be he shall take my handAnd lead me into his dark landAnd close my eyes and quench my breath—It may be I shall pass him still.I have a rendezvous with DeathOn some scarred slope of battered hill,When Spring comes round again this yearAnd the first meadow-flowers appear.God knows 'twere better to be deepPillowed in silk and scented down,Where Love throbs out in blissful sleep,Pulse nigh to pulse, and breath to breath,Where hushed awakenings are dear ...But I've a rendezvous with DeathAt midnight in some flaming town,When Spring trips north again this year,And I to my pledged word am true,I shall not fail that rendezvous.

"
"

Who shall invoke her, who shall be her priest,With single rites the common debt to pay?On some green headland fronting to the EastOur fairest boy shall kneel at break of day.Naked, uplifting in a laden trayNew milk and honey and sweet-tinctured wine,Not without twigs of clustering apple-sprayTo wreath a garland for Our Lady's shrine.The morning planet poised above the seaShall drop sweet influence through her drowsing lid;Dew-drenched, his delicate virginityShall scarce disturb the flowers he kneels amid,That, waked so lightly, shall lift up their eyes,Cushion his knees, and nod between his thighs.

"
"

Purged, with the life they left, of allThat makes life paltry and mean and small,In their new dedication chargedWith something heightened, enriched, enlarged,That lends a light to their lusty browsAnd a song to the rhythm of their trampling feet,These are the men that have taken vows,These are the hardy, the flower, the élite,—These are the men that are moved no moreBy the will to traffic and grasp and storeAnd ring with pleasure and wealth and loveThe circles that self is the centre of;But they are moved by the powers that forceThe sea for ever to ebb and rise,That hold Arcturus in his course,And marshal at noon in tropic skiesThe clouds that tower on some snow-capped chairAnd drift out over the peopled plain.They are big with the beauty of cosmic things.Mark how their columns surge! They seemTo follow the goddess with outspread wingsThat points toward Glory, the soldier's dream.With bayonets bare and flags unfurled,They scale the summits of the worldAnd fade on the farthest golden heightIn fair horizons full of light.Comrades in arms there—friend or foe—That trod the perilous, toilsome trailThrough a world of ruin and blood and woeIn the years of great decision—hail!Friend or foe, it shall matter nought;This only matters, in fine: we fought.For we were young and in love or strifeSought exultation and craved excess:To sound the wildest debauch in lifeWe staked our youth and its loveliness.Let idlers argue the right and wrongAnd weigh what merit our causes had.Putting our faith in being strong—Above the level of good and bad—For us, we battled and burned and killedBecause evolving Nature willed,And it was our pride and boast to beThe instruments of Destiny.There was a stately drama writBy the hand that peopled the earth and airAnd set the stars in the infiniteAnd made night gorgeous and morning fair,And all that had sense to reason knewThat bloody drama must be gone through.Some sat and watched how the action veered—Waited, profited, trembled, cheered—We saw not clearly nor understood,But yielding ourselves to the master hand,Each in his part as best he could,We played it through as the author planned.

"
"







(To have been read before the statue of Lafayette and Washington in Paris, on Decoration Day, May 30, 1916)







                                         IAy, it is fitting on this holiday,Commemorative of our soldier dead,When—with sweet flowers of our New England MayHiding the lichened stones by fifty years made gray—Their graves in every town are garlanded,That pious tribute should be given tooTo our intrepid fewObscurely fallen here beyond their seas.Those to preserve their country's greatness died;But by the death of theseSomething that we can look upon with prideHas been achieved, nor wholly unrepliedCan sneerers triumph in the charge they makeThat from a war where Freedom was at stakeAmerica withheld and, daunted, stood aside.                                         IIBe they remembered here with each reviving spring,Not only that in May, when life is loveliest,Around Neuville-Saint-Vaast and the disputed crestOf Vimy, they, superb, unfaltering,In that fine onslaught that no fire could halt,Parted impetuous to their first assault;But that they brought fresh hearts and springlike tooTo that high mission, and 'tis meet to strewWith twigs of lilac and spring's earliest roseThe cenotaph of thoseWho in the cause that history most endearsFell in the sunny morn and flower of their young years.                                         IIIYet sought they neither recompense nor praise,Nor to be mentioned in another breathThan their blue-coated comrades whose great daysIt was their pride to share—ay, share even to the death!Nay, rather, France, to you they rendered thanks(Seeing they came for honour, not for gain),Who, opening to them your glorious ranks,Gave them that grand occasion to excel,That chance to live the life most free from stainAnd that rare privilege of dying well.                                         IVO friends! I know not since that war beganFrom which no people nobly stands aloofIf in all moments we have given proofOf virtues that were thought American.I know not if in all things done and saidAll has been well and good,Or of each one of us can hold his headAs proudly as he should,Or, from the pattern of those mighty deadWhose shades our country venerates to-day,If we 've not somewhat fallen and somewhat gone astray,But you to whom our land's good name is dear,If there be any hereWho wonder if her manhood be decreased,Relaxed its sinews and its blood less redThan that at Shiloh and Antietam shed,Be proud of these, have joy in this at least,And cry: Now heaven be praisedThat in that hour that most imperilled her,Menaced her liberty who foremost raisedEurope's bright flag of freedom, some there wereWho, not unmindful of the antique debt,Came back the generous path of Lafayette;And when of a most formidable foeShe checked each onset, arduous to stem—Foiled and frustrated them—On those red fields where blow with furious blowWas countered, whether the gigantic frayRolled by the Meuse or at the Bois Sabot,Accents of ours were in the fierce mêlée;And on those furthest rims of hallowed groundWhere the forlorn, the gallant charge expires,When the slain bugler has long ceased to sound,And on the tangled wiresThe last wild rally staggers, crumbles, stops,Withered beneath the shrapnel's iron showers:—Now heaven be thanked, we gave a few brave drops;Now heaven be thanked, a few brave drops were ours.'                                         VThere, holding still, in frozen steadfastness,Their bayonets toward the beckoning frontiers,They lie—our comrades—lie among their peers,Clad in the glory of fallen warriors,Grim clustered under thorny trellises,Dry, furthest foam upon disastrous shores,Leaves that made last year beautiful, still strewnEven as they fell, unchanged, beneath the changing moon;And earth in her divine indifferenceRolls on, and many paltry things and meanPrate to be heard and caper to be seen.But they are silent, clam; their eloquenceIs that incomparable attitude;No human presences their witness are,But summer clouds and sunset crimson-hued,And showers and night winds and the northern starNay, even our salutations seem profane,Opposed to their Elysian quietude;Our salutations calling from afar,From our ignobler planeAnd undistinction of our lesser parts:Hail, brothers, and farewell; you are twice blest, brave hearts.Double your glory is who perished thus,For you have died for France and vindicated us.

"
"

Let the bird of loudest lay On the sole Arabian tree Herald sad and trumpet be, To whose sound chaste wings obey. But thou shrieking harbinger, Foul precurrer of the fiend, Augur of the fever's end, To this troop come thou not near. From this session interdict Every fowl of tyrant wing, Save the eagle, feather'd king; Keep the obsequy so strict. Let the priest in surplice white, That defunctive music can, Be the death-divining swan, Lest the requiem lack his right. And thou treble-dated crow, That thy sable gender mak'st With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st, 'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go. Here the anthem doth commence: Love and constancy is dead; Phoenix and the Turtle fled In a mutual flame from hence. So they lov'd, as love in twain Had the essence but in one; Two distincts, division none: Number there in love was slain. Hearts remote, yet not asunder; Distance and no space was seen 'Twixt this Turtle and his queen: But in them it were a wonder. So between them love did shine That the Turtle saw his right Flaming in the Phoenix' sight: Either was the other's mine. Property was thus appalled That the self was not the same; Single nature's double name Neither two nor one was called. Reason, in itself confounded, Saw division grow together, To themselves yet either neither, Simple were so well compounded; That it cried, ""How true a twain Seemeth this concordant one! Love has reason, reason none, If what parts can so remain."" Whereupon it made this threne To the Phoenix and the Dove, Co-supremes and stars of love, As chorus to their tragic scene:                  threnosBeauty, truth, and rarity, Grace in all simplicity, Here enclos'd, in cinders lie. Death is now the Phoenix' nest, And the Turtle's loyal breast To eternity doth rest, Leaving no posterity: 'Twas not their infirmity, It was married chastity. Truth may seem but cannot be; Beauty brag but 'tis not she; Truth and beauty buried be. To this urn let those repair That are either true or fair; For these dead birds sigh a prayer.

"
"

Tell you I chyll,

If that ye wyll

A whyle be styll,

Of a comely gyll

That dwelt on a hyll:

But she is not gryll,

For she is somwhat sage

And well worne in age;

For her vysage

It would aswage

A mannes courage.

Her lothely lere

Is nothynge clere,

But ugly of chere,

Droupy and drowsy,

Scurvy and lowsy;

Her face all bowsy,

Comely crynkled,

Woundersly wrynkled,

Lyke a rost pygges eare,

Brystled wyth here.

Her lewde lyppes twayne,

They slaver, men sayne,

Lyke a ropy rayne,

A gummy glayre:

She is ugly fayre;

Her nose somdele hoked,

And camously croked,

Never stoppynge,

But ever droppynge;

Her skynne lose and slacke,

Grained lyke a sacke;

With a croked backe.

Her eyen gowndy

Are full unsowndy,

For they are blered;

And she gray hered;

Jawed lyke a jetty;

A man would have pytty

To se how she is gumbed,

Fyngered and thumbed,

Gently joynted,

Gresed and annoynted

Up to the knockles;

The bones of her huckels

Lyke as they were with buckels

Togyther made fast:

Her youth is farre past:

Foted lyke a plane,

Legged lyke a crane;

And yet she wyll jet,

Lyke a jollyvet,

In her furred flocket,

And gray russet rocket,

With symper the cocket.

Her huke of Lyncole grene,

It had ben hers, I wene,

More then fourty yere;

And so doth it apere,

For the grene bare thredes

Loke lyke sere wedes,

Wyddered lyke hay,

The woll worne away;

And yet I dare saye

She thynketh herselfe gaye

Upon the holy daye,

Whan she doth her aray,

And gyrdeth in her gytes

Stytched and pranked with pletes;

Her kyrtel Brystow red,

With clothes upon her hed

That wey a sowe of led,

Wrythen in wonder wyse,

After the Sarasyns gyse

With a whym wham,

Knyt with a trym tram,

Upon her brayne pan,

Lyke an Egyptian,

Capped about:

When she goeth out

Herselfe for to shewe,

She dryveth downe the dewe

Wyth a payre of heles

As brode as two wheles;

She hobles as a gose

With her blanket hose

Over the falowe;

Her shone smered wyth talowe,

Gresed upon dyrt

That baudeth her skyrt.

And this comely dame,

I understande, her name

Is Elynour Rummynge,

At home in her wonnynge;

And as men say

She dwelt in Sothray,

In a certayne stede

Bysyde Lederhede.

She is a tonnysh gyb;

The devyll and she be syb.

But to make up my tale,

She breweth noppy ale,

And maketh therof port sale

To travellars, to tynkers,

To sweters, to swynkers,

And all good ale drynkers,

That wyll nothynge spare,

But drynke tyll they stare

And brynge themselfe bare,

With, ""Now away the mare,

And let us sley care,

As wyse as an hare!""

Come who so wyll

To Elynour on the hyll,

Wyth, ""Fyll the cup, fyll,""

And syt there by styll,

Erly and late:

Thyther cometh Kate,

Cysly, and Sare,

With theyr legges bare,

And also theyr fete,

Hardely, full unswete;

Wyth theyr heles dagged,

Theyr kyrtelles all to-jagged,

Theyr smockes all to-ragged,

Wyth titters and tatters,

Brynge dysshes and platters,

Wyth all theyr myght runnynge

To Elynour Rummynge,

To have of her tunnynge:

She leneth them on the same.

And thus begynneth the game.

Instede of coyne and monny,

Some brynge her a conny,

And some a pot with honny,

Some a salt, and some a spone,

Some theyr hose, some theyr shone;

Some ran a good trot

With a skellet or a pot;

Some fyll theyr pot full

Of good Lemster woll:

An huswyfe of trust,

Whan she is athrust,

Suche a webbe can spyn,

Her thryft is full thyn.

Some go streyght thyder,

Be it slaty or slyder;

They holde the hye waye,

They care not what men say,

Be that as be maye;

Some, lothe to be espyde,

Start in at the backe syde,

Over the hedge and pale,

And all for the good ale.

Some renne tyll they swete,

Brynge wyth them malte or whete,

And dame Elynour entrete

To byrle them of the best.

Than cometh an other gest;

She swered by the rode of rest,

Her lyppes are so drye,

Without drynke she must dye;

Therefore fyll it by and by,

And have here a pecke of ry.

Anone cometh another,

As drye as the other,

And wyth her doth brynge

Mele, salte, or other thynge,

Her harvest gyrdle, her weddyng rynge,

To pay for her scot

As cometh to her lot.

Som bryngeth her husbandes hood,

Because the ale is good;

Another brought her his cap

To offer to the ale-tap,

Wyth flaxe and wyth towe;

And some brought sowre dowe;

Wyth, ""Hey, and wyth, Howe,

Syt we downe a-rowe,

And drynke tyll we blowe,

And pype tyrly tyrlowe!""

Some layde to pledge

Theyr hatchet and theyr wedge,

Theyr hekell and theyr rele,

Theyr rocke, theyr spynnyng whele;

And some went so narrowe,

They layde to pledge theyr wharrowe,

Theyr rybskyn and theyr spyndell,

Theyr nedell and theyr thymbell:

Here was scant thryft

Whan they made suche shyft

Theyr thrust was so great,

They asked never for mete,

But drynke, styll drynke,

""And let the cat wynke,

Let us washe our gommes

From the drye crommes!""

But some than sat ryght sad

That nothynge had

There of theyre awne,

Neyther gelt nor pawne;

Suche were there menny

That had not a penny,

But, whan they should walke,

Were fayne wyth a chalke

To score on the balke,

Or score on the tayle:

God gyve it yll hayle!

For my fyngers ytche;

I have wrytten to mytche

Of this mad mummynge

Of Elynour Rummynge:

Thus endeth the gest

Of this worthy fest!Quod Skelton, Laureat.

"
"

We swing ungirded hips,And lightened are our eyes,The rain is on our lips,We do not run for prize.We know not whom we trustNor whitherward we fare,But we run because we must    Through the great wide air.The waters of the seasAre troubled as by storm.The tempest strips the treesAnd does not leave them warm.Does the tearing tempest pause?Do the tree-tops ask it why?So we run without a cause    'Neath the big bare sky.The rain is on our lips,We do not run for prize.But the storm the water whipsAnd the wave howls to the skies.The winds arise and strike itAnd scatter it like sand,And we run because we like it    Through the broad bright land.

"
"

It was a summer evening,    Old Kaspar's work was done,And he before his cottage door    Was sitting in the sun,And by him sported on the green    His little grandchild Wilhelmine.She saw her brother Peterkin    Roll something large and round,Which he beside the rivulet    In playing there had found;He came to ask what he had found,    That was so large, and smooth, and round.Old Kaspar took it from the boy,    Who stood expectant by;And then the old man shook his head,    And, with a natural sigh,""'Tis some poor fellow's skull,"" said he,    ""Who fell in the great victory.""I find them in the garden,    For there's many here about;And often when I go to plough,    The ploughshare turns them out!For many thousand men,"" said he,    ""Were slain in that great victory.""""Now tell us what 'twas all about,""    Young Peterkin, he cries;And little Wilhelmine looks up    With wonder-waiting eyes;""Now tell us all about the war,    And what they fought each other for.""""It was the English,"" Kaspar cried,    ""Who put the French to rout;But what they fought each other for,    I could not well make out;But everybody said,"" quoth he,    ""That 'twas a famous victory.""My father lived at Blenheim then,    Yon little stream hard by;They burnt his dwelling to the ground,    And he was forced to fly;So with his wife and child he fled,    Nor had he where to rest his head.""With fire and sword the country round    Was wasted far and wide,And many a childing mother then,    And new-born baby died;But things like that, you know, must be    At every famous victory.""They say it was a shocking sight    After the field was won;For many thousand bodies here    Lay rotting in the sun;But things like that, you know, must be    After a famous victory.""Great praise the Duke of Marlbro' won,    And our good Prince Eugene.""""Why, 'twas a very wicked thing!""    Said little Wilhelmine.""Nay... nay... my little girl,"" quoth he,    ""It was a famous victory.""And everybody praised the Duke    Who this great fight did win.""""But what good came of it at last?""    Quoth little Peterkin.""Why that I cannot tell,"" said he,    ""But 'twas a famous victory.""

"
"

The summer and autumn had been so wet,That in winter the corn was growing yet,'Twas a piteous sight to see all aroundThe grain lie rotting on the ground.Every day the starving poorCrowded around Bishop Hatto's door,For he had a plentiful last-year's store,And all the neighbourhood could tellHis granaries were furnish'd well.At last Bishop Hatto appointed a dayTo quiet the poor without delay;He bade them to his great Barn repair,And they should have food for the winter there.Rejoiced such tidings good to hear,The poor folk flock'd from far and near;The great barn was full as it could holdOf women and children, and young and old.Then when he saw it could hold no more,Bishop Hatto he made fast the door;And while for mercy on Christ they call,He set fire to the Barn and burnt them all.""I'faith 'tis an excellent bonfire!"" quoth he,""And the country is greatly obliged to me,For ridding it in these times forlornOf Rats that only consume the corn.""So then to his palace returned he,And he sat down to supper merrily,And he slept that night like an innocent man;But Bishop Hatto never slept again.In the morning as he enter'd the hallWhere his picture hung against the wall,A sweat like death all over him came,For the Rats had eaten it out of the frame.As he look'd there came a man from his farm—He had a countenance white with alarm;""My Lord, I open'd your granaries this morn,And the Rats had eaten all your corn.""Another came running presently,And he was pale as pale could be,""Fly! my Lord Bishop, fly,"" quoth he,""Ten thousand Rats are coming this way,...The Lord forgive you for yesterday!""""I'll go to my tower on the Rhine,"" replied he,""'Tis the safest place in Germany;The walls are high and the shores are steep,And the stream is strong and the water deep.""Bishop Hatto fearfully hasten'd away,And he crost the Rhine without delay,And reach'd his tower, and barr'd with careAll the windows, doors, and loop-holes there.He laid him down and closed his eyes;...But soon a scream made him arise,He started and saw two eyes of flameOn his pillow from whence the screaming came.He listen'd and look'd;... it was only the Cat;And the Bishop he grew more fearful for that,For she sat screaming, mad with fearAt the Army of Rats that were drawing near.For they have swum over the river so deep,And they have climb'd the shores so steep,And up the Tower their way is bent,To do the work for which they were sent.They are not to be told by the dozen or score,By thousands they come, and by myriads and more,Such numbers had never been heard of before,Such a judgment had never been witness'd of yore.Down on his knees the Bishop fell,And faster and faster his beads did he tell,As louder and louder drawing nearThe gnawing of their teeth he could hear.And in at the windows and in at the door,And through the walls helter-skelter they pour,And down from the ceiling and up through the floor,From the right and the left, from behind and before,From within and without, from above and below,And all at once to the Bishop they go.They have whetted their teeth against the stones,And now they pick the Bishop's bones:They gnaw'd the flesh from every limb,For they were sent to do judgment on him!

"
"

My days among the Dead are past;    Around me I behold,Where'er these casual eyes are cast,    The mighty minds of old;My never-failing friends are they,With whom I converse day by day.With them I take delight in weal,    And seek relief in woe;And while I understand and feel    How much to them I owe,My cheeks have often been bedew'dWith tears of thoughtful gratitude.My thoughts are with the Dead, with them    I live in long-past years,Their virtues love, their faults condemn,    Partake their hopes and fears,And from their lessons seek and findInstruction with an humble mind.My hopes are with the Dead, anon    My place with them will be,And I with them shall travel on    Through all Futurity;Yet leaving here a name, I trust,That will not perish in the dust.

"
"

You are old, Father William, the young man cried,    The few locks which are left you are grey;You are hale, Father William, a hearty old man,    Now tell me the reason I pray.In the days of my youth, Father William replied,    I remember'd that youth would fly fast,And abused not my health and my vigour at first    That I never might need them at last.You are old, Father William, the young man cried,    And pleasures with youth pass away,And yet you lament not the days that are gone,    Now tell me the reason I pray.In the days of my youth, Father William replied,    I remember'd that youth could not last;I thought of the future whatever I did,    That I never might grieve for the past.You are old, Father William, the young man cried,    And life must be hastening away;You are chearful, and love to converse upon death!    Now tell me the reason I pray.I am chearful, young man, Father William replied,    Let the cause thy attention engage;In the days of my youth I remember'd my God!    And He hath not forgotten my age.

"
"

A Well there is in the west country,    And a clearer one never was seen;There is not a wife in the west country    But has heard of the Well of St. Keyne.An oak and an elm-tree stand beside,    And behind doth an ash-tree grow,And a willow from the bank above    Droops to the water below.A traveller came to the Well of St. Keyne;    Joyfully he drew nigh,For from the cock-crow he had been travelling,    And there was not a cloud in the sky.He drank of the water so cool and clear,    For thirsty and hot was he,And he sat down upon the bank    Under the willow-tree.There came a man from the house hard by    At the Well to fill his pail;On the Well-side he rested it,    And he bade the Stranger hail.""Now art thou a bachelor, Stranger?"" quoth he,    ""For an if thou hast a wife,The happiest draught thou hast drank this day    That ever thou didst in thy life.""Or has thy good woman, if one thou hast,    Ever here in Cornwall been?For an if she have, I'll venture my life    She has drank of the Well of St. Keyne.""""I have left a good woman who never was here.""    The Stranger he made reply,""But that my draught should be the better for that,    I pray you answer me why?""""St. Keyne,"" quoth the Cornish-man, ""many a time    Drank of this crystal Well,And before the Angel summon'd her,    She laid on the water a spell.""If the Husband of this gifted Well    Shall drink before his Wife,A happy man thenceforth is he,    For he shall be Master for life.""But if the Wife should drink of it first,—    God help the Husband then!""The Stranger stoopt to the Well of St. Keyne,    And drank of the water again.""You drank of the Well I warrant betimes?""    He to the Cornish-man said:But the Cornish-man smiled as the Stranger spake,    And sheepishly shook his head.""I hasten'd as soon as the wedding was done,    And left my Wife in the porch;But i' faith she had been wiser than me,    For she took a bottle to Church.""

"
"



Wyatt resteth here, that quick could never rest;

Whose heavenly gifts increased by disdain,

And virtue sank the deeper in his breast;

Such profit he by envy could obtain.

A head where wisdom mysteries did frame,

Whose hammers beat still in that lively brain

As on a stithy where that some work of fame

Was daily wrought, to turn to Britain's gain.

A visage stern and mild, where both did grow,

Vice to contemn, in virtue to rejoice;

Amid great storms, whom grace assured so

To live upright and smile at fortune's choice.

A hand that taught what might be said in rhyme;

That reft Chaucer the glory of his wit:

A mark, the which (unparfited, for time)

Some may approach, but never none shall hit.

A tongue that served in foreign realms his king;

Whose courteous talk to virtue did enflame

Each noble heart; a worthy guide to bring

Our English youth by travail unto fame.

An eye whose judgment none affect could blind,

Friends to allure, and foes to reconcile;

Whose piercing look did represent a mind

With virtue fraught, reposed, void of guile.

A heart where dread was never so impress'd,

To hide the thought that might the truth advance;

In neither fortune loft, nor yet repress'd,

To swell in wealth, or yield unto mischance.

A valiant corps, where force and beauty met;

Happy, alas, too happy, but for foes!

Lived, and ran the race, that Nature set:

Of manhood's shape, where she the mould did lose.

But to the heavens that simple soul is fled,

Which left with such as covet Christ to know

Witness of faith that never shall be dead,

Sent for our health, but not received so.

Thus, for our guilt, this jewel have we lost;

The earth his bones, the heavens possess his ghost.

"
"







(Written by Martial)









My friend, the things that do attain

The happy life be these, I find:

The riches left, not got with pain,

The fruitful ground; the quiet mind;

The equal friend; no grudge, no strife;

No charge of rule nor governance;

Without disease the healthy life;

The household of continuance;

The mean diet, no dainty fare;

True wisdom joined with simpleness;

The night discharged of all care,

Where wine the wit may not oppress;

The faithful wife, without debate;

Such sleeps as may beguile the night:

Content thyself with thine estate,

Neither wish death, nor fear his might.

"
"

As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: All was black,In heaven no single star, on earth no track;A brooding hush without a stir or note,The air so thick it clotted in my throat;And thus for hours; then some enormous thingsSwooped past with savage cries and clanking wings:      But I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: Eyes of fireGlared at me throbbing with a starved desire;The hoarse and heavy and carnivorous breathWas hot upon me from deep jaws of death;Sharp claws, swift talons, fleshless fingers coldPlucked at me from the bushes, tried to hold:      But I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: Lo you, there,That hillock burning with a brazen glare;Those myriad dusky flames with points a-glowWhich writhed and hissed and darted to and fro;A Sabbath of the Serpents, heaped pell-mellFor Devil's roll-call and some fête of Hell:      Yet I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: Meteors ranAnd crossed their javelins on the black sky-span;The zenith opened to a gulf of flame,The dreadful thunderbolts jarred earth's fixed frame:The ground all heaved in waves of fire that surgedAnd weltered round me sole there unsubmerged:      Yet I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: Air once more,And I was close upon a wild sea-shore;Enormous cliffs arose on either hand,The deep tide thundered up a league-broad strand;White foambelts seethed there, wan spray swept and flew;The sky broke, moon and stars and clouds and blue:      And I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: On the leftThe sun arose and crowned a broad crag-cleft;There stopped and burned out black, except a rim,A bleeding eyeless socket, red and dim;Whereon the moon fell suddenly south-west,And stood above the right-hand cliffs at rest:      Still I strode on austere;      No hope could have no fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: From the rightA shape came slowly with a ruddy light;A woman with a red lamp in her hand,Bareheaded and barefooted on that strand;O desolation moving with such grace!O anguish with such beauty in thy face.      I fell as on my bier,      Hope travailed with such fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: I was twain,Two selves distinct that cannot join again;One stood apart and knew but could not stir,And watched the other stark in swoon and her;And she came on, and never turned aside,Between such sun and moon and roaring tide:      And as she came more near      My soul grew mad with fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: Hell is mildAnd piteous matched with that accursèd wild;A large black sign was on her breast that bowed,A broad black band ran down her snow-white shroud;That lamp she held was her own burning heart,Whose blood-drops trickled step by step apart;      The mystery was clear;      Mad rage had swallowed fear.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: By the seaShe knelt and bent above that senseless me;Those lamp-drops fell upon my white brow there,She tried to cleanse them with her tears and hair;She murmured words of pity, love, and woe,She heeded not the level rushing flow:      And mad with rage and fear,      I stood stonebound so near.As I came through the desert thus it was,As I came through the desert: When the tideSwept up to her there kneeling by my side,She clasped that corpse-like me, and they were borneAway, and this vile me was left forlorn;I know the whole sea cannot quench that heart,Or cleanse that brow, or wash those two apart:      They love; their doom is drear,      Yet they nor hope nor fear;But I, what do I here?

"
"

HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far Outshon the wealth of Ormus and of Ind, Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand Showrs on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold, Satan exalted sat, by merit rais'd To that bad eminence; and from despair Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue Vain Warr with Heav'n, and by success untaught His proud imaginations thus displaid. Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav'n, For since no deep within her gulf can hold Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall'n, I give not Heav'n for lost.   From this descent Celestial vertues rising, will appear More glorious and more dread then from no fall, And trust themselves to fear no second fate: Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav'n Did first create your Leader, next free choice, With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight, Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss Thus farr at least recover'd, hath much more Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne Yielded with full consent.   The happier state In Heav'n, which follows dignity, might draw Envy from each inferior; but who here Will envy whom the highest place exposes Formost to stand against the Thunderers aim Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share Of endless pain? where there is then no good For which to strive, no strife can grow up there From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell Precedence, none, whose portion is so small Of present pain, that with ambitious mind Will covet more.   With this advantage then To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord, More then can be in Heav'n, we now return To claim our just inheritance of old, Surer to prosper then prosperity Could have assur'd us; and by what best way, Whether of open Warr or covert guile, We now debate; who can advise, may speak. He ceas'd, and next him Moloc, Scepter'd King Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit That fought in Heav'n; now fiercer by despair: His trust was with th' Eternal to be deem'd Equal in strength, and rather then be less Car'd not to be at all; with that care lost Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse He reck'd not, and these words thereafter spake. My sentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles, More unexpert, I boast not: them let those Contrive who need, or when they need, not now. For while they sit contriving, shall the rest, Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here Heav'ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame, The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns By our delay? no, let us rather choose Arm'd with Hell flames and fury all at once O're Heav'ns high Towrs to force resistless way, Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise Of his Almighty Engin he shall hear Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see Black fire and horror shot with equal rage Among his Angels; and his Throne it self Mixt with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire, His own invented Torments.   But perhaps The way seems difficult and steep to scale With upright wing against a higher foe. Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still, That in our proper motion we ascend Up to our native seat: descent and fall To us is adverse.   Who but felt of late When the fierce Foe hung on our brok'n Rear Insulting, and pursu'd us through the Deep, With what compulsion and laborious flight We sunk thus low?   Th' ascent is easie then; Th' event is fear'd; should we again provoke Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find To our destruction: if there be in Hell Fear to be worse destroy'd: what can be worse Then to dwell here, driv'n out from bliss, condemn'd In this abhorred deep to utter woe; Where pain of unextinguishable fire Must exercise us without hope of end The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge Inexorably, and the torturing hour Calls us to Penance?   More destroy'd then thus We should be quite abolisht and expire. What fear we then? what doubt we to incense His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag'd, Will either quite consume us, and reduce To nothing this essential, happier farr Then miserable to have eternal being: Or if our substance be indeed Divine, And cannot cease to be, we are at worst On this side nothing; and by proof we feel Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav'n, And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme, Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne: Which if not Victory is yet Revenge. He ended frowning, and his look denounc'd Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous To less then Gods.   On th' other side up rose Belial, in act more graceful and humane; A fairer person lost not Heav'n; he seemd For dignity compos'd and high exploit: But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear The better reason, to perplex and dash Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low; To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas'd the ear, And with perswasive accent thus began. I should be much for open Warr, O Peers, As not behind in hate; if what was urg'd Main reason to perswade immediate Warr, Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast Ominous conjecture on the whole success: When he who most excels in fact of Arms, In what he counsels and in what excels Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair And utter dissolution, as the scope Of all his aim, after some dire revenge. First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav'n are fill'd With Armed watch, that render all access Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night, Scorning surprize.   Or could we break our way By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise With blackest Insurrection, to confound Heav'ns purest Light, yet our great Enemy All incorruptible would on his Throne Sit unpolluted, and th' Ethereal mould Incapable of stain would soon expel Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire Victorious.   Thus repuls'd, our final hope Is flat despair: we must exasperate Th' Almighty Victor to spend all his rage, And that must end us, that must be our cure, To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose, Though full of pain, this intellectual being, Those thoughts that wander through Eternity, To perish rather, swallowd up and lost In the wide womb of uncreated night, Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows, Let this be good, whether our angry Foe Can give it, or will ever? how he can Is doubtful; that he never will is sure. Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire, Belike through impotence, or unaware, To give his Enemies thir wish, and end Them in his anger, whom his anger saves To punish endless? wherefore cease we then? Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed, Reserv'd and destin'd to Eternal woe; Whatever doing, what can we suffer more, What can we suffer worse? is this then worst, Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms? What when we fled amain, pursu'd and strook With Heav'ns afflicting Thunder, and besought The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem'd A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay Chain'd on the burning Lake? that sure was worse. What if the breath that kindl'd those grim fires Awak'd should blow them into sevenfold rage And plunge us in the flames? or from above Should intermitted vengeance arm again His red right hand to plague us? what if all Her stores were open'd, and this Firmament Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall One day upon our heads; while we perhaps Designing or exhorting glorious warr, Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl'd Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains; There to converse with everlasting groans, Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd, Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse. Warr therefore, open or conceal'd, alike My voice disswades; for what can force or guile With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye Views all things at one view? he from heav'ns highth All these our motions vain, sees and derides; Not more Almighty to resist our might Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles. Shall we then live thus vile, the Race of Heav'n Thus trampl'd, thus expell'd to suffer here Chains and these Torments? better these then worse By my advice; since fate inevitable Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree, The Victors will.   To suffer, as to doe, Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust That so ordains: this was at first resolv'd, If we were wise, against so great a foe Contending, and so doubtful what might fall. I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold And vent'rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear What yet they know must follow, to endure Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain, The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear, Our Supream Foe in time may much remit His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov'd Not mind us not offending, satisfi'd With what is punish't; whence these raging fires Will slack'n, if his breath stir not thir flames. Our purer essence then will overcome Thir noxious vapour, or enur'd not feel, Or chang'd at length, and to the place conformd In temper and in nature, will receive Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain; This horror will grow milde, this darkness light, Besides what hope the never-ending flight Of future dayes may bring, what chance, what change Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers For happy though but ill, for ill not worst, If we procure not to our selves more woe. Thus Belial with words cloath'd in reasons garb Counsel'd ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath, Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake. Either to disinthrone the King of Heav'n We warr, if warr be best, or to regain Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then May hope when everlasting Fathe shall yeild To fickle Chance and Chaos judge the strife: The former vain to hope argues as vain The latter: for what place can be for us Within Heav'ns bound, unless Heav'ns Lord supream We overpower?   Suppose he should relent And publish Grace to all, on promise made Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we Stand in his presence humble, and receive Strict Laws impos'd, to celebrate his Throne With warbl'd Hymns, and to his God head sing Forc't Halleluia's; while he Lordly sits Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers, Our servile offerings.   This must be our task In Heav'n this our delight; how wearisom Eternity so spent in worship paid To whom we hate.   Let us not then pursue By force impossible, by leave obtain'd Unacceptable, though in Heav'n, our state Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek Our own good from our selves, and from our own Live to our selves, though in this vast recess, Free, and to none accountable, preferring Hard liberty before the easie yoke Of servile Pomp.   Our greatness will appeer Then most conspicuous, when great things of small, Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse We can create, and in what place so e're Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain Through labour and indurance.   This deep world Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst Thick clouds and dark doth Heav'ns all-ruling Sire Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur'd, And with the Majesty of darkness round Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar Must'ring thir rage, and Heav'n resembles Hell? As he our darkness, cannot we his Light Imitate when we please? This Desart soile Wants not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold; Nor want we skill or Art, from whence to raise Magnificence; and what can Heav'n shew more? Our torments also may in length of time Become our Elements, these piercing Fires As soft as now severe, our temper chang'd Into their temper; which must needs remove The sensible of pain.   All things invite To peaceful Counsels, and the settl'd State Of order, how in safety best we may Compose our present evils, with regard Of what we are and were, dismissing quite All thoughts of warr: ye have what I advise. He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld Th' Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain The sound of blustring winds, which all night long Had rous'd the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull Sea-faring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay After the Tempest:   Such applause was heard As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleas'd, Advising peace: for such another Field They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael Wrought still within them; and no less desire To found this nether Empire, which might rise By pollicy, and long process of time, In emulation opposite to Heav'n. Which when Beelzebub perceiv'd, then whom, Satan except, none higher sat, with grave Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem'd A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven Deliberation sat and public care; And Princely counsel in his face yet shon, Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look Drew audience and attention still as Night Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake. Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-spring of heav'n Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now Must we renounce, and changing stile be call'd Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote Inclines, here to continue, and build up here A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream, And know not that the King of Heav'n hath doom'd This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt From Heav'ns high jurisdiction, in new League Banded against his Throne, but to remaine In strictest bondage, though thus far remov'd, Under th' inevitable curb, reserv'd His captive multitude: For he, be sure In heighth or depth, still first and last will Reign Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part By our revolt, but over Hell extend His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav'n. What sit we then projecting peace and Warr? Warr hath determin'd us, and foild with loss Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none Voutsaf't or sought; for what peace will be giv'n To us enslav'd, but custody severe, And stripes, and arbitrary punishment Inflicted? and what peace can we return, But to our power hostility and hate, Untam'd reluctance, and revenge though slow, Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce In doing what we most in suffering feel? Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need With dangerous expedition to invade Heav'n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege, Or ambush from the Deep.   What if we find Some easier enterprize? There is a place (If ancient and prophetic fame in Heav'n Err not) another World, the happy seat Of some new Race call'd Man, about this time To be created like to us, though less In power and excellence, but favour'd more Of him who rules above; so was his will Pronounc'd among the Gods, and by an Oath, That shook Heav'ns whol circumference, confirm'd. Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn What creatures there inhabit, of what mould, Or substance, how endu'd, and what thir Power, And where thir weakness, how attempted best, By force or suttlety: Though Heav'n be shut, And Heav'ns high Arbitrator sit secure In his own strength, this place may lye expos'd The utmost border of his Kingdom, left To their defence who hold it: here perhaps Som advantagious act may be achiev'd By sudden onset, either with Hell fire To waste his whole Creation, or possess All as our own, and drive as we were driven, The punie habitants, or if not drive, Seduce them to our Party, that thir God May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand Abolish his own works.   This would surpass Common revenge, and interrupt his joy In our Confusion, and our joy upraise In his disturbance; when his darling Sons HurI'd headlong to partake with us, shall curse Thir frail Original, and faded bliss, Faded so soon.   Advise if this be worth Attempting, or to sit in darkness here Hatching vain Empires. Thus Beelzebub Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis'd By Satan, and in part propos'd: for whence, But from the Author of all ill could Spring So deep a malice, to confound the race Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell To mingle and involve, done all to spite The great Creatour?   But thir spite still serves His glory to augment.   The bold design Pleas'd highly those infernal States, and joy Sparkl'd in all thir eyes; with full assent They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews. Well have ye judg'd, well ended long debate, Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are, Great things resolv'd; which from the lowest deep Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate, Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms And opportune excursion we may chance Re-enter Heav'n; or else in some milde Zone Dwell not unvisited of Heav'ns fair Light Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air, To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires Shall breathe her balme.   But first whom shall we send In search of this new world, whom shall we find Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandring feet The dark unbottom'd infinite Abyss And through the palpable obscure find out His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight Upborn with indefatigable wings Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick Of Angels watching round?   Here he had need All circumspection, and we now no less Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send, The weight of all and our last hope relies. This said, he sat; and expectation held His look suspence, awaiting who appeer'd To second, or oppose, or undertake The perilous attempt: but all sat mute, Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each In others count'nance read his own dismay Astonisht: none among the choice and prime Of those Heav'n-warring Champions could be found So hardie as to proffer or accept Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last Satan, whom now transcendent glory rais'd Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride Conscious of highest worth, unmov'd thus spake. O Progeny of Heav'n, Empyreal Thrones, With reason hath deep silence and demurr Seis'd us, though undismaid: long is the way And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light; Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire, Outrageous to devour, immures us round Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant Barr'd over us prohibit all egress. These past, if any pass, the void profound Of unessential Night receives him next Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being Threatens him, plung'd in that abortive gulf. If thence he scape into whatever world, Or unknown Region, what remains him less Then unknown dangers and as hard escape. But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers, And this Imperial Sov'ranty, adorn'd With splendor, arm'd with power, if aught propos'd And judg'd of public moment, in the shape Of difficulty or danger could deterr Mee from attempting.   Wherefore do I assume These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign, Refusing to accept as great a share Of hazard as of honour, due alike To him who Reigns, and so much to him due Of hazard more, as he above the rest High honourd sits? Go therfore mighty Powers, Terror of Heav'n, though fall'n; intend at home, While here shall be our home, what best may ease The present misery, and render Hell More tollerable; if there be cure or charm To respite or deceive, or slack the pain Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek Deliverance for us all: this enterprize None shall partake with me.   Thus saying rose The Monarch, and prevented all reply, Prudent, least from his resolution rais'd Others among the chief might offer now (Certain to be refus'd) what erst they feard; And so refus'd might in opinion stand His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute Which he through hazard huge must earn.   But they Dreaded not more th' adventure then his voice Forbidding; and at once with him they rose; Thir rising all at once was as the sound Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend With awful reverence prone; and as a God Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav'n: Nor fail'd they to express how much they prais'd, That for the general safety he despis'd His own: for neither do the Spirits damn'd Loose all thir virtue; least bad men should boast Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites, Or clos ambition varnisht o're with zeal. Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief: As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o'respread Heav'ns chearful face, the lowring Element Scowls ore the dark'nd lantskip Snow, or showre; If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet Extend his ev'ning beam, the fields revive, The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings. O shame to men!   Devil with Devil damn'd Firm concord holds, men onely disagree Of Creatures rational, though under hope Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace, Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife Among themselves, and levie cruel warres, Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy: As if (which might induce us to accord) Man had not hellish foes anow besides, That day and night for his destruction waite. The Stygian Counsel thus dissolv'd; and forth In order came the grand infernal Peers, Midst came thir mighty Paramount, and seemd Alone th' Antagonist of Heav'n, nor less Than Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream, And God-like imitated State; him round A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos'd With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms. Then of thir Session ended they bid cry With Trumpets regal sound the great result: Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie By Haralds voice explain'd: the hollow Abyss Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell With deafning shout, return'd them loud acclaim. Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais'd By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers Disband, and wandring, each his several way Pursues, as inclination or sad choice Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain The irksom hours, till this great Chief return. Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime Upon the wing, or in swift Race contend, As at th' Olympian Games or Pythian fields; Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form. As when to warn proud Cities warr appears Wag'd in the troubl'd Skie, and Armies rush To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van Prick forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir Spears Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms From either end of Heav'n the welkin burns. Others with vast Typhoean rage more fell Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar. As when Alcides from Oechalia Crown'd With conquest, felt th' envenom'd robe, and tore Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines, And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw Into th' Euboic Sea.   Others more milde, Retreated in a silent valley, sing With notes Angelical to many a Harp Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance. Thir Song was partial, but the harmony (What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?) Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment The thronging audience.   In discourse more sweet (For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,) Others apart sat on a Hill retir'd, In thoughts more elevate, and reason'd high Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate, Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledg absolute, And found no end, in wandring mazes lost. Of good and evil much they argu'd then, Of happiness and final misery, Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame, Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie: Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm Pain for a while or anguish, and excite Fallacious hope, or arm th' obdured brest With stubborn patience as with triple steel. Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands, On bold adventure to discover wide That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps Might yield them easier habitation, bend Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge Into the burning Lake thir baleful streams; Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate, Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep; Cocytus, nam'd of lamentation loud Heard on the ruful stream; fierce Phlegeton Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage. Farr off from these a slow and silent stream, Lethe the River of Oblivion roules Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks, Forthwith his former state and being forgets, Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain. Beyond this flood a frozen Continent Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice, A gulf profound as that Serbonian Bog Betwixt Damiata and mount Casius old, Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air Burns frore, and cold performs th' effect of Fire. Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail'd, At certain revolutions all the damn'd Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce, From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine Immovable, infixt, and frozen round, Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire. They ferry over this Lethean Sound Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment, And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe, All in one moment, and so neer the brink; But Fate withstands, and to oppose th' attempt Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards The Ford, and of it self the water flies All taste of living wight, as once it fled The lip of Tantalus.   Thus roving on In confus'd march forlorn, th' adventrous Bands With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast View'd first thir lamentable lot, and found No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile They pass'd, and many a Region dolorous, O're many a Frozen, many a fierie Alpe, Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death, A Universe of death, which God by curse Created evil, for evil only good, Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds, Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things, Abominable, inutterable, and worse Than Fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd, Gorgons and Hydra's, and Chimera's dire. Mean while the Adversary of God and Man, Satan with thoughts inflam'd of highest design, Puts on swift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell Explores his solitary flight; som times He scours the right hand coast, som times the left, Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soares Up to the fiery Concave touring high. As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri'd Hangs in the Clouds, by Aequinoctial Winds Close sailing from Bengala, or the Iles Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring Thir spicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.   So seem'd Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass, Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock, Impenetrable, impal'd with circling fire, Yet unconsum'd.   Before the Gates there sat On either side a formidable shape; The one seem'd Woman to the waste, and fair, But ended foul in many a scaly fould Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm'd With mortal sting: about her middle round A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark'd With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep, If aught disturb'd thir noyse, into her woomb, And kennel there, yet there still bark'd and howl'd, Within unseen.   Farr less abhorrd than these Vex'd Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts Calabria from the hoarce Trinacrian shore: Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call'd In secret, riding through the Air she comes Lur'd with the smell of infant blood, to dance With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon Eclipses at thir charms.   The other shape, If shape it might be call'd that shape had none Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb, Or substance might be call'd that shadow seem'd, For each seem'd either; black it stood as Night, Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell, And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem'd his head The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on. Satan was now at hand, and from his seat The Monster moving onward came as fast With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode. Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admir'd, Admir'd, not fear'd; God and his Son except, Created thing naught valu'd he nor shun'd; And with disdainful look thus first began. Whence and what art thou, execrable shape, That dar'st, though grim and terrible, advance Thy miscreated Front athwart my way To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass, That be assur'd, without leave askt of thee: Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof, Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav'n. To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply'd, Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee, Who first broke peace in Heav'n and Faith, till then Unbrok'n, and in proud rebellious Arms Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Sons Conjur'd against the highest, for which both Thou And they outcast from God, are here condemn'd To waste Eternal dayes in woe and pain? And reck'n'st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav'n, Hell-doom'd, and breath'st defiance here and scorn Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more, Thy King and Lord?   Back to thy punishment, False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings, Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before. So spake the grieslie terrour, and in shape, So speaking and so threatning, grew tenfold More dreadful and deform: on th' other side Incenst with indignation Satan stood Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burn'd, That fires the length of Ophiucus huge In th' Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair Shakes Pestilence and Warr.   Each at the Head Level'd his deadly aime; thir fatall hands No second stroke intend, and such a frown Each cast at th' other, as when two black Clouds With Heav'ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on Over the Caspian, then stand front to front Hov'ring a space, till Winds the signal blow To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air: So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood; For never but once more was either like To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds Had been achiev'd, whereof all Hell had rung, Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key, Ris'n, and with hideous outcry rush'd between. O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry'd, Against thy only Son?   What fury O Son, Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart Against thy Fathers head? and know'st for whom; For him who sits above and laughs the while At thee ordain'd his drudge, to execute What e're his wrath, which he calls justice, bids, His wrath which one day will destroy ye both. She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest Forbore, then these to her Satan return'd: So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange Thou interposest, that my sudden hand Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds What it intends; till first I know of thee, What thing thou art, thus double-form'd, and why In this infernal Vaile first met thou call'st Me Father, and that Fantasm ca11'st my Son? I know thee not, nor ever saw till now Sight more detestable then him and thee. T' whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply'd; Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem Now in thine eyes so foul, once deemd so fair In Heav'n, when at th' Assembly, and in sight Of all the Seraphim with thee combin'd In bold conspiracy against Heav'ns King, All on a sudden miserable pain Surpris'd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast Threw forth, till on the left side op'ning wide, Likest to thee in shape and count'nance bright, Then shining heav'nly fair, a Goddess arm'd Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seis'd All th' Host of Heav'n; back they recoild affraid At first, and call'd me Sin, and for a Sign Portentous held me; but familiar grown, I pleas'd, and with attractive graces won The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing Becam'st enamour'd, and such joy thou took'st With me in secret, that my womb conceiv'd A growing burden.   Mean while Warr arose, And fields were fought in Heav'n; wherein remaind (For what could else) to our Almighty Foe Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout Through all the Empyrean: down they fell Driv'n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down Into this Deep, and in the general fall I also; at which time this powerful Key Into my hand was giv'n, with charge to keep These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass Without my op'ning.   Pensive here I sat Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes. At last this odious offspring whom thou seest Thine own begotten, breaking violent way Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew Transform'd: but he my inbred enemie Forth issu'd, brandishing his fatal Dart Made to destroy: I fled, and cry'd out Death; Hell trembl'd at the hideous Name, and sigh'd From all her Caves, and back resounded Death. I fled, but he pursu'd (though more, it seems, Inflam'd with lust then rage) and swifter far, Mee overtook his mother all dismaid, And in embraces forcible and foule Ingendring with me, of that rape begot These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv'd And hourly born, with sorrow infinite To me, for when they list into the womb That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw My Bowels, thir repast; then bursting forth A fresh with conscious terrours vex me round, That rest or intermission none I find. Before mine eyes in opposition sits Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on, And me his Parent would full soon devour For want of other prey, but that he knows His end with mine involvd; and knows that I Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane, When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc'd. But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope To be invulnerable in those bright Arms, Though temper'd heav'nly, for that mortal dint, Save he who reigns above, none can resist. She finish'd, and the suttle Fiend his lore Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth. Dear Daughter, since thou claim'st me for thy Sire, And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge Of dalliance had with thee in Heav'n, and joys Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know I come no enemie, but to set free From out this dark and dismal house of pain, Both him and thee, and all the heav'nly Host Of Spirits that in our just pretenses arm'd Fell with us from on high: from them I go This uncouth errand sole, and one for all My self expose, with lonely steps to tread Th' unfounded deep, and through the void immense To search with wandring quest a place foretold Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now Created vast and round, a place of bliss In the Pourlieues of Heav'n, and therein plac't A race of upstart Creatures, to supply Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov'd, Least Heav'n surcharg'd with potent multitude Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught Then this more secret now design'd, I haste To know, and this once known, shall soon return, And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen Wing silently the buxom Air, imbalm'd With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill'd Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey. He ceas'd, for both seemd highly pleasd, and Death Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear His famine should be fill'd, and blest his mawe Destin'd to that good hour: no less rejoyc'd His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire. The key of this infernal Pit by due, And by command of Heav'ns all-powerful King I keep, by him forbidden to unlock These Adamantine Gates; against all force Death ready stands to interpose his dart, Fearless to be o'rmatcht by living might. But what ow I to his commands above Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down Into this gloom of Tartarus profound, To sit in hateful Office here confin'd, Inhabitant of Heav'n, and heav'nlie-born, Here in perpetual agonie and pain, With terrors and with clamors compasst round Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed: Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou My being gav'st me; whom should I obey But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon To that new world of light and bliss, among The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems Thy daughter and thy darling, without end. Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key, Sad instrument of all our woe, she took; And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train, Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew, Which but her self not all the Stygian powers Could once have mov'd; then in the key-hole turns Th' intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease Unfast'ns: on a sudden op'n flie With impetuous recoile and jarring sound Th' infernal dores, and on thir hinges grate Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook Of Erebus.   She op'nd, but to shut Excel'd her power; the Gates wide op'n stood, That with extended wings a Bannerd Host Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array; So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth Cast forth redounding smoak and ruddy flame. Before thir eyes in sudden view appear The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark Illimitable Ocean without bound, Without dimension, where length, breadth, & highth, And time and place are lost; where eldest Night And Chaos.   Ancestors of Nature, hold Eternal Anarchie, amidst the noise Of endless Warrs, and by confusion stand. For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag Of each his Faction, in thir several Clanns, Light-arm'd or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow, Swarm populous, unnumber'd as the Sands Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil, Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise Thir lighter wings.   To whom these most adhere, Hee rules a moment; Chaos Umpire sits, And by decision more imbroiles the fray By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter Chance governs all.   Into this wilde Abyss, The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave, Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire, But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt Confus'dly, and which thus must ever fight, Unless th' Almighty Maker them ordain His dark materials to create more Worlds, Into this wild Abyss the warie fiend Stood on the brink of Hell and look'd a while, Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith He had to cross.   Nor was his eare less peal'd With noises loud and ruinous (to compare Great things with small) then when Bellona storms, With all her battering Engines bent to rase Som Capital City; or less then if this frame Of Heav'n were falling, and these Elements In mutinie had from her Axle torn The stedfast Earth.   At last his Sail-broad Vannes He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets A vast vacuitie: all unawares Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour Down had been falling, had not by ill chance The strong rebuff of som tumultuous cloud Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him As many miles aloft: that furie stay'd, Quencht in a Boggie Syrtis, neither Sea, Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares, Treading the crude consistence, half on foot, Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile. As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale, Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stelth Had from his wakeful custody purloind The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, With head, hands, wings or feet pursues his way, And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes: At length a universal hubbub wilde Of stunning sounds and voices all confus'd Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes, Undaunted to meet there what ever power Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne Of Chaos, and his dark Pavilion spread Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthron'd Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things, The Consort of his Reign; and by them stood Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name Of Demogorgon; Rumor next and Chance, And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild, And Discord with a thousand various mouths. T' whom Satan turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss, Chaos and ancient Night, I come no Spy, With purpose to explore or to disturb The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint Wandring this darksome Desart, as my way, Lies through your spacious Empire up to light, Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds Confine with Heav'n; or if som other place From your Dominion won, th' Ethereal King Possesses lately, thither to arrive I travel this profound, direct my course; Directed no mean recompence it brings To your behoof, if I that Region lost, All usurpation thence expell'd, reduce To her original darkness and your sway (Which is my present journey) and once more Erect the Standard there of ancient Night; Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge. Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old With faultring speech and visage incompos'd Answer'd. I know thee, stranger, who thou art, That mighty leading Angel, who of late Made head against Heav'ns King, though overthrown. I saw and heard, for such a numerous Host Fled not in silence through the frighted deep With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, Confusion worse confounded; and Heav'n Gates Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands Pursuing.   I upon my Frontieres here Keep residence; if all I can will serve, That little which is left so to defend, Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath; Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World Hung ore my Realm, link'd in a golden Chain To that side Heav'n from whence your Legions fell: If that way be your walk, you have not farr; So much the neerer danger; go and speed; Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain. He ceas'd; and Satan staid not to reply, But glad that now his Sea should find a shore, With fresh alacritie and force renew'd Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock Of fighting Elements, on all sides round Environ'd wins his way; harder beset And more endanger'd, then when Argo pass'd Through Bosporus betwixt the justling Rocks: Or when Ulysses on the Larbord shunnd Charybdis, and by th' other whirlpool steard. So he with difficulty and labour hard Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour hee; But hee once past, soon after when man fell, Strange alteration!   Sin and Death amain Following his track, such was the will of Heav'n, Pav'd after him a broad and beat'n way Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf Tamely endur'd a Bridge of wondrous length From Hell continu'd reaching th' utmost Orbe Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse With easie intercourse pass to and fro To tempt or punish mortals, except whom God and good Angels guard by special grace. But now at last the sacred influence Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav'n Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins Her fardest verge, and Chaos to retire As from her outmost works a brok'd foe With tumult less and with less hostile din, That Satan with less toil, and now with ease Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn; Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air, Weighs his spread wings, at leasure to behold Farr off th' Empyreal Heav'n, extended wide In circuit, undetermind square or round, With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn'd Of living Saphire, once his native Seat; And fast by hanging in a golden Chain This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon. Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge, Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies.

"
"

HAil holy Light, ofspring of Heav'n first-born, Or of th' Eternal Coeternal beam May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light, And never but in unapproached light Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee, Bright effluence of bright essence increate. Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream, Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun, Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest The rising world of waters dark and deep, Won from the void and formless infinite. Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing, Escap't the Stygian Pool, though long detain'd In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight Through utter and through middle darkness borne With other notes then to th' Orphean Lyre I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night, Taught by the heav'nly Muse to venture down The dark descent, and up to reascend, Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe, And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou Revisit'st not these eyes, that rowle in vain To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs, Or dim suffusion veild.   Yet not the more Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill, Smit with the love of sacred Song; but chief Thee Sion and the flowrie Brooks beneath That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow, Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget Those other two equal'd with me in Fate, So were I equal'd with them in renown, Blind Thamyris and blind Maeonides, And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old. Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid Tunes her nocturnal Note.   Thus with the Year Seasons return, but not to me returns Day, or the sweet approach of Ev'n or Morn, Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose, Or flocks, or heards, or human face divine; But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the chearful wayes of men Cut off, and for the Book of knowledg fair Presented with a Universal blanc Of Natures works to mee expung'd and ras'd, And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out. So much the rather thou Celestial light Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell Of things invisible to mortal sight. Now had the Almighty Father from above, From the pure Empyrean where he sits High Thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye, His own works and their works at once to view: About him all the Sanctities of Heaven Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv'd Beatitude past utterance; on his right The radiant image of his Glory sat, His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld Our two first Parents, yet the onely two Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac't, Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love, Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love In blissful solitude; he then survey'd Hell and the Gulf between, and Satan there Coasting the wall of Heav'n on this side Night In the dun Air sublime, and ready now To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet On the bare outside of this World, that seem'd Firm land imbosom'd without Firmament, Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air. Him God beholding from his prospect high, Wherein past, present, future he beholds, Thus to his onely Son foreseeing spake. Onely begotten Son, seest thou what rage Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds Prescrib'd, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems On desparate reveng, that shall redound Upon his own rebellious head.   And now Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way Not farr off Heav'n, in the Precincts of light, Directly towards the new created World, And Man there plac't, with purpose to assay If him by force he can destroy, or worse, By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert For man will hark'n to his glozing lyes, And easily transgress the sole Command, Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall, Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault? Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee All he could have; I made him just and right, Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall. Such I created all th' Ethereal Powers And Spirits, both them who stood and them who faild; Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love, Where onely what they needs must do, appeard, Not what they would? what praise could they receive? What pleasure I from such obedience paid, When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice) Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild, Made passive both, had servd necessitie, Not mee.   They therefore as to right belongd, So were created, nor can justly accuse Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate, As if predestination over-rul'd Thir will, dispos'd by absolute Decree Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew, Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, Which had no less prov'd certain unforeknown. So without least impulse or shadow of Fate, Or aught by me immutablie foreseen, They trespass, Authors to themselves in all Both what they judge and what they choose; for so I formd them free, and free they must remain, Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain'd Thir freedom, they themselves ordain'd thir fall. The first sort by thir own suggestion fell, Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceiv'd By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace, The other none: in Mercy and Justice both, Through Heav'n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel, But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine. Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill'd All Heav'n, and in the blessed Spirits elect Sense of new joy ineffable diffus'd: Beyond compare the Son of God was seen Most glorious, in him all his Father shon Substantially express'd, and in his face Divine compassion visibly appeerd, Love without end, and without measure Grace, Which uttering thus he to his Father spake. O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace; For which both Heav'n and Earth shall high extoll Thy praises, with th' innumerable sound Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne Encompass'd shall resound thee ever blest. For should Man finally be lost, should Man Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest Son Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd With his own folly? that be from thee farr, That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judg Of all things made, and judgest onely right. Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught, Or proud return though to his heavier doom, Yet with revenge accomplish't and to Hell Draw after him the whole Race of mankind, By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self Abolish thy Creation, and unmake, For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made? So should thy goodness and thy greatness both Be questiond and blaspheam'd without defence. To whom the great Creatour thus reply'd. O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight, Son of my bosom, Son who art alone My word, my wisdom, and effectual might, All hast thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all As my Eternal purpose hath decreed: Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will, Yet not of will in him, but grace in me Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthrall'd By sin to foul exorbitant desires; Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand On even ground against his mortal foe, By me upheld, that he may know how frail His fall'n condition is, and to me ow All his deliv'rance, and to none but me. Some I have chosen of peculiar grace Elect above the rest; so is my will: The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes Th' incensed Deitie, while offerd grace Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark, What may sufflce, and soft'n stonie hearts To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due, Though but endevord with sincere intent, Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. And I will place within them as a guide My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear, Light after light well us'd they shall attain, And to the end persisting, safe arrive. This my long sufferance and my day of grace They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste; But hard be hard'nd, blind be blinded more, That they may stumble on, and deeper fall; And none but such from mercy I exclude. But yet all is not don; Man disobeying, Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns Against the high Supremacie of Heav'n, Affecting God-head, and so loosing all, To expiate his Treason hath naught left, But to destruction sacred and devote, He with his whole posteritie must dye, Dye hee or Justice must; unless for him Som other able, and as willing, pay The rigid satisfaction, death for death. Say Heav'nly powers, where shall we find such love, Which of ye will be mortal to redeem Mans mortal crime, and just th' unjust to save, Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare? He ask'd, but all the Heav'nly Quire stood mute, And silence was in Heav'n: on mans behalf Patron or Intercessor none appeerd, Much less that durst upon his own head draw The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. And now without redemption all mankind Must have bin lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell By doom severe, had not the Son of God, In whom the fulness dwels of love divine, His dearest mediation thus renewd. Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace; And shall grace not find means, that finds her way, The speediest of thy winged messengers, To visit all thy creatures, and to all Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought, Happie for man, so coming; he her aide Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost; Attonement for himself or offering meet, Indebted and undon, hath none to bring: Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life I offer, on mee let thine anger fall; Account mee man; I for his sake will leave Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee Freely put off, and for him lastly dye Well pleas'd, on me let Death wreck all his rage; Under his gloomie power I shall not long Lie vanquisht; thou hast givn me to possess Life in my self for ever, by thee I live, Though now to Death I yield, and am his due All that of me can die, yet that debt paid, Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule For ever with corruption there to dwell; But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue My vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile; Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm'd. I through the ample Air in Triumph high Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show The powers of darkness bound.   Thou at the sight Pleas'd, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile, While by thee rais'd I ruin all my Foes, Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave: Then with the multitude of my redeemd Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne, Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud Of anger shall remain, but peace assur'd, And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire. His words here ended, but his meek aspect Silent yet spake, and breath'd immortal love To mortal men, above which only shon Filial obedience: as a sacrifice Glad to be offer'd, he attends the will Of his great Father.   Admiration seis'd All Heav'n, what this might mean, and whither tend Wondring; but soon th' Almighty thus reply'd: O thou in Heav'n and Earth the only peace Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou My sole complacence! well thou know'st how dear, To me are all my works, nor Man the least Though last created, that for him I spare Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save, By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost. Thou therefore whom thou only canst redeem, Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyn; And be thy self Man among men on Earth, Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed, By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son. As in him perish all men, so in thee As from a second root shall be restor'd, As many as are restor'd, without thee none. His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit Imputed shall absolve them who renounce Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds, And live in thee transplanted, and from thee Receive new life.   So Man, as is most just, Shall satisfie for Man, be judg'd and die, And dying rise, and rising with him raise His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life. So Heav'nly love shall outdoo Hellish hate Giving to death, and dying to redeeme, So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate So easily destroy'd, and still destroyes In those who, when they may, accept not grace. Nor shalt thou by descending to assume Mans Nature, less'n or degrade thine owne. Because thou hast, though Thron'd in highest bliss Equal to God, and equally enjoying God-like fruition, quitted all to save A World from utter loss, and hast been found By Merit more then Birthright Son of God, Found worthiest to be so by being Good, Farr more then Great or High; because in thee Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds, Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne; Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reign Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, Anointed universal King, all Power I give thee, reign for ever, and assume Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce: All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell; When thou attended gloriously from Heav'n Shalt in the Sky appeer, and from thee send The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes The living, and forthwith the cited dead Of all past Ages to the general Doom Shall hast'n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep. Then all thy Saints assembl'd, thou shalt judge Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full, Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.   Mean while The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring New Heav'n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell, And after all thir tribulations long See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth. Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by, For regal Scepter then no more shall need, God shall be All in All.   But all ye Gods, Adore him, who to compass all this dies, Adore the Son, and honour him as mee. No sooner had th' Almighty ceas't, but all The multitude of Angels with a shout Loud as from numbers without number, sweet As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna's filld Th' eternal Regions: lowly reverent Towards either Throne they bow, and to the ground With solemn adoration down they cast Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold, Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence To Heav'n remov'd where first it grew, there grows, And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life, And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn Rowls o're Elisian Flours her Amber stream; With these that never fade the Spirits elect Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams, Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon Impurpl'd with Celestial Roses smil'd. Then Crown'd again thir gold'n Harps they took, Harps ever tun'd, that glittering by thir side Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet Of charming symphonie they introduce Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high; No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine Melodious part, such concord is in Heav'n. Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent, Immutable, Immortal, Infinite, Eternal King; thee Author of all being, Fountain of Light, thy self invisible Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st Thron'd inaccessible, but when thou shad'st The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine, Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer, Yet dazle Heav'n, that brightest Seraphim Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes. Thee next they sang of all Creation first, Begotten Son, Divine Similitude, In whose conspicuous count'nance, without cloud Made visible, th' Almighty Father shines, Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee Impresst the effulgence of his Glorie abides, Transfus'd on thee his ample Spirit rests. Hee Heav'n of Heavens and all the Powers therein By thee created, and by thee threw down Th' aspiring Dominations: thou that day Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare, Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook Heav'ns everlasting Frame, while o're the necks Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarraid. Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime Thee only extoll'd, Son of thy Fathers might, To execute fierce vengeance on his foes, Not so on Man; him through their malice fall'n, Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome So strictly, but much more to pitie encline: No sooner did thy dear and onely Son Perceive thee purpos'd not to doom frail Man So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin'd, He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife Of Mercy and justice in thy face discern'd, Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat Second to thee, offerd himself to die For mans offence.   O unexampl'd love, Love no where to be found less then Divine! Hail Son of God, Saviour of Men, thy Name Shall be the copious matter of my Song Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine. Thus they in Heav'n, above the starry Sphear, Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent. Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe Of this round World, whose first convex divides The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos'd From Chaos and th' inroad of Darkness old, Satan alighted walks: a Globe farr off It seem'd, now seems a boundless Continent Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night Starless expos'd, and ever-threatning storms Of Chaos blustring round, inclement skie; Save on that side which from the wall of Heav'n Though distant farr som small reflection gaines Of glimmering air less vext with tempest loud: Here walk'd the Fiend at large in spacious field. As when a Vultur on Imaus bred, Whose snowie ridge the roving Tartar bounds, Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams; But in his way lights on the barren Plaines Of Sericana, where Chineses drive With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light: So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend Walk'd up and down alone bent on his prey, Alone, for other Creature in this place Living or liveless to be found was none, None yet, but store hereafter from the earth Up hither like Aereal vapours flew Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin With vanity had filld the works of men: Both all things vain, and all who in vain things Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or lasting fame, Or happiness in this or th' other life; All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal, Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds; All th, unaccomplisht works of Natures hand, Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixt, Dissolvd on Earth, fleet hither, and in vain, Till final dissolution, wander here, Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd; Those argent Fields more likely habitants, Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold Betwixt th' Angelical and Human kinde: Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born First from the ancient World those Giants came With many a vain exploit, though then renownd: The builders next of Babel on the Plain Of Sennaar, and still with vain designe New Babels, had they wherewithall, would build: Others came single; he who to be deemd A God, leap'd fondly into Aetna flames, Empedocles, and hee who to enjoy Plato's Elysium, leap'd into the Sea, Cleombrotus, and many more too long, Embryo's and Idiots, Eremits and Friers White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie. Here Pilgrims roam, that stray'd so farr to seek In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heav'n; And they who to be sure of Paradise Dying put on the weeds of Dominic, Or in Franciscan think to pass disguis'd; They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt, And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov'd; And now Saint Peter at Heav'ns Wicket seems To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot Of Heav'ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe A violent cross wind from either Coast Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry Into the devious Air; then might ye see Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads, Indulgences, Dispenses, Pardons, Bulls, The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft Fly o're the backside of the World farr off Into a Limbo large and broad, since calld The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown Long after, now unpeopl'd, and untrod; All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass'd, And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste His travell'd steps; farr distant he descries Ascending by degrees magnificent Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high, At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate With Frontispice of Diamond and Gold Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn. The Stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw Angels ascending and descending, bands Of Guardians bright, when he from Esau fled To Padan-Aram in the field of Luz, Dreaming by night under the open Skie, And waking cri'd, This is the Gate of Heav'n. Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood There alwayes, but drawn up to Heav'n somtimes Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flow'd Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv'd, Wafted by Angels, or flew o're the Lake Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds. The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss. Direct against which op'nd from beneath, Just o're the blissful seat of Paradise, A passage down to th' Earth, a passage wide, Wider by farr then that of after-times Over Mount Sion, and, though that were large, Over the Promis'd Land to God so dear, By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes, On high behests his Angels to and fro Pass'd frequent, and his eye with choice regard From Paneas the fount of Jordans flood To Beersaba, where the Holy Land Borders on Aegypt and the Arabian shoare; So wide the op'ning seemd, where bounds were set To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave. Satan from hence now on the lower stair That scal'd by steps of Gold to Heav'n Gate Looks down with wonder at the sudden view Of all this World at once.   As when a Scout Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone All night; at last by break of chearful dawne Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill, Which to his eye discovers unaware The goodly prospect of some forein land First-seen, or some renown'd Metropolis With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd, Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams. Such wonder seis'd, though after Heaven seen, The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis'd At sight of all this World beheld so faire. Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood So high above the circling Canopie Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point Of Libra to the fleecie Starr that bears Andromeda farr off Atlantic Seas Beyond th' Horizon; then from Pole to Pole He views in bredth, and without longer pause Down right into the Worlds first Region throws His flight precipitant, and windes with ease Through the pure marble Air his oblique way Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds, Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles, Like those Hesperian Gardens fam'd of old, Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales, Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there He stayd not to enquire: above them all The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven Allur'd his eye: Thither his course he bends Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe By center, or eccentric, hard to tell, Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie Alooff the vulgar Constellations thick, That from his Lordly eye keep distance due, Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute Days, months, & years, towards his all-chearing Lamp Turn swift thir various motions, or are turnd By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms The Univers, and to each inward part With gentle penetration, though unseen, Shoots invisible vertue even to the deep: So wondrously was set his Station bright. There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps Astronomer in the Sun's lucent Orbe Through his glaz'd Optic Tube yet never saw. The place he found beyond expression bright, Compar'd with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone; Not all parts like, but all alike informd With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire; If mettal, part seemd Gold, part Silver cleer; If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite, Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon In Aarons Brest-plate, and a stone besides Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen, That stone, or like to that which here below Philosophers in vain so long have sought, In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde Volatil Hermes, and call up unbound In various shapes old Proteus from the Sea, Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme. What wonder then if fields and regions here Breathe forth Elixir pure, and Rivers run Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch Th' Arch-chimic Sun so farr from us remote Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixt Here in the dark so many precious things Of colour glorious and effect so rare? Here matter new to gaze the Devil met Undazl'd, farr and wide his eye commands, For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade, But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon Culminate from th' Aequator, as they now Shot upward still direct, whence no way round Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire, No where so cleer, sharp'nd his visual ray To objects distant farr, whereby he soon Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand, The same whom John saw also in the Sun: His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid; Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar Circl'd his Head, nor less his Locks behind Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy'd He seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep. Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope To find who might direct his wandring flight To Paradise the happie seat of Man, His journies end and our beginning woe. But first he casts to change his proper shape, Which else might work him danger or delay: And now a stripling Cherube he appeers, Not of the prime, yet such as in his face Youth smil'd Celestial, and to every Limb Sutable grace diffus'd, so well he feignd; Under a Coronet his flowing haire In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore Of many a colourd plume sprinkl'd with Gold, His habit fit for speed succinct, and held Before his decent steps a Silver wand. He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright, Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd, Admonisht by his ear, and strait was known Th' Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seav'n Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes That run through all the Heav'ns, or down to th' Earth Bear his swift errands over moist and dry, O're Sea and Land: him Satan thus accostes; Uriel, for thou of those seav'n Spirits that stand In sight of God's high Throne, gloriously bright, The first art wont his great authentic will Interpreter through highest Heav'n to bring, Where all his Sons thy Embassie attend; And here art likeliest by supream decree Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye To visit oft this new Creation round; Unspeakable desire to see, and know All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man, His chief delight and favour, him for whom All these his works so wondrous he ordaind, Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim Alone thus wandring.   Brightest Seraph tell In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none, But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell; That I may find him, and with secret gaze, Or open admiration him behold On whom the great Creator hath bestowd Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd; That both in him and all things, as is meet, The Universal Maker we may praise; Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss Created this new happie Race of Men To serve him better: wise are all his wayes. So spake the false dissembler unperceivd; For neither Man nor Angel can discern Hypocrisie, the onely evil that walks Invisible, except to God alone, By his permissive will, through Heav'n and Earth: And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil'd Uriel, though Regent of the Sun, and held The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav'n; Who to the fraudulent Impostor foule In his uprightness answer thus returnd. Fair Angel, thy desire which tends to know The works of God, thereby to glorifie The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess That reaches blame, but rather merits praise The more it seems excess, that led thee hither From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone, To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps Contented with report hear onely in heav'n: For wonderful indeed are all his works, Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all Had in remembrance alwayes with delight; But what created mind can comprehend Thir number, or the wisdom infinite That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep. I saw when at his Word the formless Mass, This worlds material mould, came to a heap: Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar Stood rul'd, stood vast infinitude confin'd; Till at his second bidding darkness fled, Light shon, and order from disorder sprung: Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire, And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav'n Flew upward, spirited with various forms, That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move; Each had his place appointed, each his course, The rest in circuit walles this Universe. Look downward on that Globe whose hither side With light from hence, though but reflected, shines; That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light His day, which else as th' other Hemisphere Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon (So call that opposite fair Starr) her aide Timely interposes, and her monthly round Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav'n; With borrowd light her countenance triform Hence fills and empties to enlighten th' Earth, And in her pale dominion checks the night. That spot to which I point is Paradise, Adams abode, those loftie shades his Bowre. Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires. Thus said, he turnd, and Satan bowing low, As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven, Where honour due and reverence none neglects, Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath, Down from th' Ecliptic, sped with hop'd success, Throws his steep flight in many an Aerie wheele, Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights.

"
"

O For that warning voice, which he who saw Th' Apocalyps, heard cry in Heaven aloud, Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, Came furious down to be reveng'd on men, Wo to the inhabitants on Earth! that now, While time was, our first-Parents had bin warnd The coming of thir secret foe, and scap'd Haply so scap'd his mortal snare; for now Satan, now first inflam'd with rage, came down, The Tempter ere th' Accuser of man-kind, To wreck on innocent frail man his loss Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell: Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold, Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast, Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth Now rowling, boiles in his tumultuous brest, And like a devillish Engine back recoiles Upon himself; horror and doubt distract His troubl'd thoughts, and from the bottom stirr The Hell within him, for within him Hell He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell One step no more then from himself can fly By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie Of what he was, what is, and what must be Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue. Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad, Sometimes towards Heav'n and the full-blazing Sun, Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre: Then much revolving, thus in sighs began. O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd, Look'st from thy sole Dominion like the God Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call, But with no friendly voice, and add thy name O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams That bring to my remembrance from what state I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare; Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down Warring in Heav'n against Heav'ns matchless King: Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return From me, whom he created what I was In that bright eminence, and with his good Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. What could be less then to afford him praise, The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks, How due! yet all his good prov'd ill in me, And wrought but malice; lifted up so high I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher Would set me highest, and in a moment quit The debt immense of endless gratitude, So burthensome still paying, still to ow; Forgetful what from him I still receivd, And understood not that a grateful mind By owing owes not, but still pays, at once Indebted and dischargd; what burden then? O had his powerful Destiny ordaind Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais'd Ambition.   Yet why not? som other Power As great might have aspir'd, and me though mean Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within Or from without, to all temptations arm'd. Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand? Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse, But Heav'ns free Love dealt equally to all? Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate, To me alike, it deals eternal woe. Nay curs'd be thou; since against his thy will Chose freely what it now so justly rues. Me miserable! which way shall I flie Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire? Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell; And in the lowest deep a lower deep Still threatning to devour me opens wide, To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav'n. O then at last relent: is there no place Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left? None left but by submission; and that word Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd With other promises and other vaunts Then to submit, boasting I could subdue Th' Omnipotent.   Ay me, they little know How dearly I abide that boast so vaine, Under what torments inwardly I groane; While they adore me on the Throne of Hell, With Diadem and Scepter high advanc'd The lower still I fall, onely Supream In miserie; such joy Ambition findes. But say I could repent and could obtaine By Act of Grace my former state; how soon Would higth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay What feign'd submission swore: ease would recant Vows made in pain, as violent and void. For never can true reconcilement grow Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc'd so deep: Which would but lead me to a worse relapse And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare Short intermission bought with double smart. This knows my punisher; therefore as farr From granting hee, as I from begging peace: All hope excluded thus, behold in stead Of us out-cast, exil'd, his new delight, Mankind created, and for him this World. So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear, Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost; Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least Divided Empire with Heav'ns King I hold By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne; As Man ere long, and this new World shall know. Thus while he spake, each passion dimm'd his face Thrice chang'd with pale, ire, envie and despair, Which marrd his borrow'd visage, and betraid Him counterfet, if any eye beheld. For heav'nly mindes from such distempers foule Are ever cleer.   Whereof hee soon aware, Each perturbation smooth'd with outward calme, Artificer of fraud; and was the first That practisd falshood under saintly shew, Deep malice to conceale, couch't with revenge: Yet not anough had practisd to deceive Uriel once warnd; whose eye pursu'd him down The way he went, and on th' Assyrian mount Saw him disfigur'd, more then could befall Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce He markd and mad demeanour, then alone, As he suppos'd, all unobserv'd, unseen. So on he fares, and to the border comes, Of Eden, where delicious Paradise, Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green, As with a rural mound the champain head Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides With thicket overgrown, grottesque and wilde, Access deni'd; and over head up grew Insuperable highth of loftiest shade, Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm, A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre Of stateliest view.   Yet higher then thir tops The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung: Which to our general Sire gave prospect large Into his neather Empire neighbouring round. And higher then that Wall a circling row Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit, Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue Appeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt: On which the Sun more glad impress'd his beams Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow, When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd That Lantskip: And of pure now purer aire Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires Vernal delight and joy, able to drive All sadness but despair: now gentle gales Fanning thir odoriferous wings dispense Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole Those balmie spoiles.   As when to them who saile Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past Mozambic, off at Sea North-East windes blow Sabean Odours from the spicie shoare Of Arabie the blest, with such delay Well pleas'd they slack thir course, and many a League Chear'd with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles. So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend Who came thir bane, though with them better pleas'd Then Asmodeus with the fishie fume, That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent From Media post to Aegypt, there fast bound. Now to th' ascent of that steep savage Hill Satan had journied on, pensive and slow; But further way found none, so thick entwin'd, As one continu'd brake, the undergrowth Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext All path of Man or Beast that past that way: One Gate there only was, and that look'd East On th' other side: which when th' arch-fellon saw Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt, At one slight bound high over leap'd all bound Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within Lights on his feet.   As when a prowling Wolfe, Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey, Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve In hurdl'd Cotes amid the field secure, Leaps o're the fence with ease into the Fould:. Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial dores, Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault, In at the window climbs, or o're the tiles; So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould: So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe. Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life, The middle Tree and highest there that grew, Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death To them who liv'd; nor on the vertue thought Of that life-giving Plant, but only us'd For prospect, what well us'd had bin the pledge Of immortality.   So little knows Any, but God alone, to value right The good before him, but perverts best things To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use. Beneath him with new wonder now he views To all delight of human sense expos'd In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more, A Heav'n on Earth, for blissful Paradise Of God the Garden was, by him in the East Of Eden planted; Eden stretchd her Line From Auran Eastward to the Royal Towrs Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings, Or where the Sons of Eden long before Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soile His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind; Out of the fertil ground he caus'd to grow All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste; And all amid them stood the Tree of Life, High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life Our Death the Tree of knowledge grew fast by, Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill. Southward through Eden went a River large, Nor chang'd his course, but through the shaggie hill Pass'd underneath ingulft, for God had thrown That Mountain as his Garden mould high rais'd Upon the rapid current, which through veins Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn, Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill Waterd the Garden; thence united fell Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood, Which from his darksom passage now appeers, And now divided into four main Streams, Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme And Country whereof here needs no account, But rather to tell how, if Art could tell, How from that Saphire Fount the crisped Brooks, Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold, With mazie error under pendant shades Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine, Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote The open field, and where the unpierc't shade lmbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place, A happy rural seat of various view; Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme, Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde Hung amiable, Hesperian Fables true, If true, here only, and of delicious taste: Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks Grasing the tender herb, were interpos'd, Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap Of som irriguous Valley spred her store, Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose: Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves Of coole recess, o're which the mantling vine Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake, That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd, Her chrystal mirror holds, unite thir streams. The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires, Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune The trembling leaves, while Universal Pan Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance Led on th' Eternal Spring.   Not that faire field Of Enna, where Proserpin gathering flours Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie Dis Was gatherd, which cost Ceres all that pain To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove Of Daphne by Orontes, and th' inspir'd Castalian Spring, might with this Paradise Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian Ile Girt with the River Triton, where old Cham, Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Lybian Jove, Hid Amalthea and her Florid Son Young Bacchus from his Stepdame Rhea's eye; Nor where Abassin Kings thir issue Guard, Mount Amara, though this by som suppos'd True Paradise under the Ethiop Line By Nilus head, enclosd with shining Rock, A whole days journy high, but wide remote From this Assyrian Garden, where the Fiend Saw undelighted all delight, all kind Of living Creatures new to sight and strange: Two of far nobler shape erect and tall, Godlike erect, with native Honour clad In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all, And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine The image of thir glorious Maker shon, Truth, wisdome, Sanctitude severe and pure, Severe but in true filial freedom plac't; Whence true autoritie in men; though both Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd; For contemplation hee and valour formd, For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace, Hee for God only, shee for God in him: His fair large Front and Eye sublime declar'd Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks Round from his parted forelock manly hung Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad: Shee as a vail down to the slender waste Her unadorned golden tresses wore Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets wav'd As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli'd Subjection, but requir'd with gentle sway, And by her yielded, by him best receivd, Yielded with coy submission, modest pride, And sweet reluctant amorous delay. Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald, Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest shame Of natures works, honor dishonorable, Sin-bred, how have ye troubl'd all mankind With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure, And banisht from mans life his happiest life, Simplicitie and spotless innocence. So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill: So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair That ever since in loves imbraces met, Adam the goodliest man of men since borne His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters Eve. Under a tuft of shade that on a green Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side They sat them down, and after no more toil Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic'd To recommend coole Zephyr, and made ease More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell, Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughes Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours: The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream; Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League, Alone as they.   About them frisking playd All Beasts of th' Earth, since wilde, and of all chase In Wood or Wilderness, Forrest or Den; Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw Dandl'd the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces, Pards, Gambold before them, th' unwieldy Elephant To make them mirth us'd all his might, and wreathd His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine His breaded train, and of his fatal guile Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat, Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun Declin'd was hasting now with prone carreer To th' Ocean Iles, and in th' ascending Scale Of Heav'n the Starrs that usher Evening rose: When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood, Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad. O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold, Into our room of bliss thus high advanc't Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps, Not Spirits, yet to heav'nly Spirits bright Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue With wonder, and could love, so lively shines In them Divine resemblance, and such grace The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd. Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh Your change approaches, when all these delights Will vanish and deliver ye to woe, More woe, the more your taste is now of joy; Happie, but for so happie ill secur'd Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav'n Ill fenc't for Heav'n to keep out such a foe As now is enterd; yet no purpos'd foe To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne Though I unpittied: League with you I seek, And mutual amitie so streight, so close, That I with you must dwell, or you with me Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such Accept your Makers work; he gave it me, Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfold, To entertain you two, her widest Gates, And send forth all her Kings; there will be room, Not like these narrow limits, to receive ass Your numerous ofspring; if no better place, Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge On you who wrong me not for him who wrongd. And should I at your harmless innocence Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just, Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg'd, By conquering this new World, compels me now To do what else though damnd I should abhorre. So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie, The Tyrants plea, excus'd his devilish deeds. Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree Down he alights among the sportful Herd Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one, Now other, as thir shape servd best his end Neerer to view his prey, and unespi'd To mark what of thir state he more might learn By word or action markt: about them round A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare, Then as a Tyger, who by chance hath spi'd In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play, Strait couches close, then rising changes oft His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground Whence rushing he might surest seize them both Grip't in each paw: When Adam first of men To first of women Eve thus moving speech, Turnd him all eare to hear new utterance flow. Sole partner and sole part of all these joyes, Dearer thy self then all; needs must the power That made us, and for us this ample World Be infinitly good, and of his good As liberal and free as infinite, That rais'd us from the dust and plac't us here In all this happiness, who at his hand Have nothing merited, nor can performe Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires From us no other service then to keep This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees In Paradise that bear delicious fruit So various, not to taste that onely Tree Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life, So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is, Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst God hath pronounc't it death to taste that Tree, The only sign of our obedience left Among so many signes of power and rule Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv'n Over all other Creatures that possess Earth, Aire, and Sea.   Then let us not think hard One easie prohibition, who enjoy Free leave so large to all things else, and choice Unlimited of manifold delights: But let us ever praise him, and extoll His bountie, following our delightful task To prune these growing Plants, and tend these Flours, Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet. To whom thus Eve repli'd.   O thou for whom And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh, And without whom am to no end, my Guide And Head, what thou hast said is just and right. For wee to him indeed all praises owe, And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee Praeeminent by so much odds, while thou Like consort to thy self canst no where find. That day I oft remember, when from sleep I first awak't, and found my self repos'd Under a shade of flours, much wondring where And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound Of waters issu'd from a Cave and spread Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov'd Pure as th' expanse of Heav'n; I thither went With unexperienc't thought, and laid me downe On the green bank, to look into the cleer Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie. As I bent down to look, just opposite, A Shape within the watry gleam appeerd Bending to look on me, I started back, It started back, but pleas'd I soon returnd, Pleas'd it returnd as soon with answering looks Of sympathie and love; there I had fixt Mine eyes till now, and pin'd with vain desire, Had not a voice thus warnd me,   What thou seest, What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self, With thee it came and goes: but follow me, And I will bring thee where no shadow staies Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call'd Mother of human Race: what could I doe, But follow strait, invisibly thus led? Till I espi'd thee, fair indeed and tall, Under a Platan, yet methought less faire, Less winning soft, less amiablie milde, Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd, Thou following cryd'st aloud, Return faire Eve, Whom fli'st thou? whom thou fli'st, of him thou art, His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart Substantial Life, to have thee by my side Henceforth an individual solace dear; Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim My other half: with that thy gentle hand Seisd mine, I yielded, and from that time see How beauty is excelld by manly grace And wisdom, which alone is truly fair. So spake our general Mother, and with eyes Of conjugal attraction unreprov'd, And meek surrender, half imbracing leand On our first Father, half her swelling Breast Naked met his under the flowing Gold Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms Smil'd with superior Love, as Jupiter On Juno smiles, when he impregns the Clouds That shed May Flowers; and press'd her Matron lip With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne Ey'd them askance, and to himself thus plaind. Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two Imparadis't in one anothers arms The happier Eden, shall enjoy thir fill Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust, Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, Among our other torments not the least, Still unfulfill'd with pain of longing pines; Yet let me not forget what I have gain'd From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems: One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call'd, Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd'n? Suspicious, reasonless.   Why should thir Lord Envie them that? can it be sin to know, Can it be death? and do they onely stand By Ignorance, is that thir happie state, The proof of thir obedience and thir faith? O fair foundation laid whereon to build Thir ruine! Hence I will excite thir minds With more desire to know, and to reject Envious commands, invented with designe To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such, They taste and die: what likelier can ensue? But first with narrow search I must walk round This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd; A chance but chance may lead where I may meet Some wandring Spirit of Heav'n, by Fountain side, Or in thick shade retir'd, from him to draw What further would be learnt.   Live while ye may, Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return, Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed. So saying, his proud step he scornful turn'd, But with sly circumspection, and began Through wood, through waste, o're hill, o're dale his roam. Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heav'n With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun Slowly descended, and with right aspect Against the eastern Gate of Paradise Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock Of Alablaster, pil'd up to the Clouds, Conspicuous farr, winding with one ascent Accessible from Earth, one entrance high; The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung Still as it rose, impossible to climbe. Betwixt these rockie Pillars Gabriel sat Chief of th' Angelic Guards, awaiting night; About him exercis'd Heroic Games Th' unarmed Youth of Heav'n, but nigh at hand Celestial Armourie, Shields, Helmes, and Speares, Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold. Thither came Uriel, gliding through the Eeven On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fir'd Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner From what point of his Compass to beware Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste. Gabriel, to thee thy course by Lot hath giv'n Charge and strict watch that to this happie Place No evil thing approach or enter in; This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare A Spirit, zealous, as he seem'd, to know More of th' Almighties works, and chiefly Man Gods latest Image: I describ'd his way Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate; But in the Mount that lies from Eden North, Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks Alien from Heav'n, with passions foul obscur'd: Mine eye pursu'd him still, but under shade Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew I fear, hath ventur'd from the deep, to raise New troubles; him thy care must be to find. To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd: Uriel, no wonder if thy perfet sight, Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst, See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass The vigilance here plac't, but such as come Well known from Heav'n; and since Meridian hour No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort, So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude Spiritual substance with corporeal barr. But if within the circuit of these walks, In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom Thou tellst, by morrow dawning I shall know. So promis'd hee, and Uriel to his charge Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now raisd Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall'n Beneath th' Azores; whither the prime Orb, Incredible how swift, had thither rowl'd Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth By shorter flight to th' East, had left him there Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend: Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray Had in her sober Liverie all things clad; Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird, They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale; She all night long her amorous descant sung; Silence was pleas'd: now glow'd the Firmament With living Saphirs: Hesperus that led The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon Rising in clouded Majestie, at length Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light, And o're the dark her Silver Mantle threw. When Adam thus to Eve: Fair Consort, th' hour Of night, and all things now retir'd to rest Mind us of like repose, since God hath set Labour and rest, as day and night to men Successive, and the timely dew of sleep Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest; Man hath his daily work of body or mind Appointed, which declares his Dignitie, And the regard of Heav'n on all his waies; While other Animals unactive range, And of thir doings God takes no account. To morrow ere fresh Morning streak the East With first approach of light, we must be ris'n, And at our pleasant labour, to reform Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green, Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown, That mock our scant manuring, and require More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth: Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms, That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth, Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease; Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest. To whom thus Eve with perfet beauty adornd. My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains, God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise. With thee conversing I forget all time, All seasons and thir change, all please alike. Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet, With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun When first on this delightful Land he spreads His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour, Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth After soft showers; and sweet the coming on Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon, And these the Gemms of Heav'n, her starrie train: But neither breath of Morn when she ascends With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure, Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers, Nor grateful Eevning mild, nor silent Night With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon, Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet. But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes? To whom our general Ancestor repli'd. Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht Eve, Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth, By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land In order, though to Nations yet unborn, Ministring light prepar'd, they set and rise; Least total darkness should by Night regaine Her old possession, and extinguish life In Nature and all things, which these soft fires Not only enlighten, but with kindly heate Of various influence foment and warme, Temper or nourish, or in part shed down Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow On Earth, made hereby apter to receive Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray. These then, though unbeheld in deep of night, Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none, That heav'n would want spectators, God want praise; Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:. All these with ceasless praise his works behold Both day and night: how often from the steep Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard Celestial voices to the midnight air, Sole, or responsive each to others note Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk With Heav'nly touch of instrumental sounds In full harmonic number joind, thir songs Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven. Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass'd On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place Chos'n by the sovran Planter, when he fram'd All things to mans delightful use; the roofe Of thickest covert was inwoven shade Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side Acanthus, and each odorous bushie shrub Fenc'd up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour, Iris all hues, Roses, and Gessamin Rear'd high thir flourisht heads between, and wrought Mosaic; underfoot the Violet, Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay Broiderd the ground, more colour'd then with stone Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none; Such was thir awe of Man.   In shadie Bower More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd, Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph, Nor Faunus haunted.   Here in close recess With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs Espoused Eve deckt first her nuptial Bed, And heav'nly Quires the Hymenaean sung, What day the genial Angel to our Sire Brought her in naked beauty more adorn'd, More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like In sad event, when to the unwiser Son Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnar'd Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng'd On him who had stole Joves authentic fire. Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv'd, both stood Both turnd, and under op'n Skie ador'd The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth and Heav'n Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe And starrie Pole: Thou also mad'st the Night, Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day, Which we in our appointed work imployd Have finisht happie in our mutual help And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss Ordaind by thee, and this delicious place For us too large, where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. But thou hast promis'd from us two a Race To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake, And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. This said unanimous, and other Rites Observing none, but adoration pure Which God likes best, into thir inmost bowre Handed they went; and eas'd the putting off These troublesom disguises which wee wear, Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites Mysterious of connubial Love refus'd: Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk Of puritie and place and innocence, Defaming as impure what God declares Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all. Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain But our destroyer, foe to God and Man? Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source Of human ofspring, sole proprietie, In Paradise of all things common else. By thee adulterous lust was driv'n from men Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee Founded in Reason, Loyal, just, and Pure, Relations dear, and all the Charities Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known. Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame, Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets, Whose bed is undefil'd and chaste pronounc't, Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us'd. Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings, Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard, Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal, Or Serenate, which the starv'd Lover sings To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept, And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair'd.   Sleep on Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek No happier state, and know to know no more. Now had night measur'd with her shaddowie Cone Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault, And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim Forth issuing at th' accustomd hour stood armd To thir night watches in warlike Parade, When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake. Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the South With strictest watch; these other wheel the North, Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear. From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge. Ithuriel and Zephon, with wingd speed Search through this Garden, leave unsearcht no nook, But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge, Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme. This Eevning from the Sun's decline arriv'd Who tells of som infernal Spirit seen Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escap'd The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt: Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring. So saying, on he led his radiant Files, Daz'ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct In search of whom they sought: him there they found Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of Eve; Assaying by his Devilish art to reach The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams, Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint Th' animal Spirits that from pure blood arise Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise At least distemperd, discontented thoughts, Vaine hopes, vaine aimes, inordinate desires Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride. Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear Touch'd lightly; for no falshood can endure Touch of Celestial temper, but returns Of force to its own likeness: up he starts Discoverd and surpriz'd.   As when a spark Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid Fit for the Tun som Magazin to store Against a rumord Warr, the Smuttie graine With sudden blaze diffus'd, inflames the Aire: So started up in his own shape the Fiend. Back stept those two faire Angels half amaz'd So sudden to behold the grieslie King; Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon. Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg'd to Hell Com'st thou, escap'd thy prison, and transform'd, Why satst thou like an enemie in waite Here watching at the head of these that sleep? Know ye not then said Satan, fill'd with scorn, Know ye not mee? ye knew me once no mate For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare; Not to know mee argues your selves unknown, The lowest of your throng; or if ye know, Why ask ye, and superfluous begin Your message, like to end as much in vain? To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, Or undiminisht brightness, to be known As when thou stoodst in Heav'n upright and pure; That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good, Departed from thee, and thou resembl'st now Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foule. But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep This place inviolable, and these from harm. So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke Severe in youthful beautie, added grace Invincible: abasht the Devil stood, And felt how awful goodness is, and saw Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin'd His loss; but chiefly to find here observd His lustre visibly impar'd; yet seemd Undaunted.   If I must contend, said he, Best with the best, the Sender not the sent, Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn, Or less be lost.   Thy fear, said Zephon bold, Will save us trial what the least can doe Single against thee wicked, and thence weak. The Fiend repli'd not, overcome with rage; But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on, Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie He held it vain; awe from above had quelld His heart, not else dismai'd.   Now drew they nigh The western Point, where those half-rounding guard just met, and closing stood in squadron joind Awaiting next command.   To whom thir Chief Gabriel from the Front thus calld aloud. O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade, And with them comes a third of Regal port, But faded splendor wan; who by his gate And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell, Not likely to part hence without contest; Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. He scarce had ended, when those two approachd And brief related whom they brought, where found, How busied, in what form and posture coucht. To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake. Why hast thou, Satan broke the bounds prescrib'd To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge Of others, who approve not to transgress By thy example, but have power and right To question thy bold entrance on this place; Imploi'd it seems to violate sleep, and those Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow. Gabriel, thou hadst in Heav'n th' esteem of wise, And such I held thee; but this question askt Puts me in doubt.   Lives ther who loves his pain? Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, Though thither doomd? Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt, And boldly venture to whatever place Farthest from pain, where thou mightest hope to change Torment with ease, and soonest recompence Dole with delight, which in this place I sought; To thee no reason; who knowst only good, But evil hast not tri'd: and wilt object His will who bound us? let him surer barr His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay In that dark durance: thus much what was askt. The rest is true, they found me where they say; But that implies not violence or harme. Thus he in scorn.The warlike Angel mov'd, Disdainfully half smiling thus repli'd. O loss of one in Heav'n to judge of wise, Since Satan fell, whom follie overthrew, And now returns him from his prison scap't, Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither Unlicenc't from his bounds in Hell prescrib'd; So wise he judges it to fly from pain However, and to scape his punishment. So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth, Which thou incurr'st by flying, meet thy flight Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain Can equal anger infinite provok't. But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief, The first in flight from pain, had'st thou alledg'd To thy deserted host this cause of flight, Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern. Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide Thy blasting volied Thunder made all speed And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear. But still thy words at random, as before, Argue thy inexperience what behooves From hard assaies and ill successes past A faithful Leader, not to hazard all Through wayes of danger by himself untri'd. I therefore, I alone first undertook To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie This new created World, whereof in Hell Fame is not silent, here in hope to find Better abode, and my afflicted Powers To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire; Though for possession put to try once more What thou and thy gay Legions dare against; Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord High up in Heav'n, with songs to hymne his Throne, And practis'd distances to cringe, not fight. To whom the warriour Angel, soon repli'd. To say and strait unsay, pretending first Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie, Argues no Leader but a lyar trac't, Satan, and couldst thou faithful add? O name, O sacred name of faithfulness profan'd! Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew? Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head; Was this your discipline and faith ingag'd, Your military obedience, to dissolve Allegeance to th' acknowldg'd Power supream? And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem Patron of liberty, who more then thou Once fawn'd, and cring'd, and servilly ador'd Heav'ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne? But mark what I arreede thee now, avant; Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre Within these hallowd limits thou appeer, Back to th' infernal pit I drag thee chaind, And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd. So threatn'd hee, but Satan to no threats Gave heed, but waxing more in rage repli'd. Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines, Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers, Us'd to the yoak, draw'st his triumphant wheels In progress through the rode of Heav'n Star-pav'd. While thus he spake, th' Angelic Squadron bright Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round With ported Spears, as thick as when a field Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves Prove chaff. On th' other side Satan allarm'd Collecting all his might dilated stood, Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov'd: His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest Sat horror Plum'd; nor wanted in his graspe What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds Might have ensu'd, nor onely Paradise In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope Of Heav'n perhaps, or all the Elements At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne With violence of this conflict, had not soon Th' Eternal to prevent such horrid fray Hung forth in Heav'n his golden Scales, yet seen Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion signe, Wherein all things created first he weighd, The pendulous round Earth with ballanc't Aire In counterpoise, now ponders all events, Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights The sequel each of parting and of fight; The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam; Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend. Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowst mine, Neither our own but giv'n; what follie then To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more Then Heav'n permits, nor mine, though doubld now To trample thee as mire: for proof look up, And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign Where thou art weigh'd, and shown how light, how weak, If thou resist. The Fiend lookt up and knew His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.

"
"

NOw Morn her rosie steps in th' Eastern ClimeAdvancing, sow'd the earth with Orient Pearle,When Adam wak't, so customd, for his sleepWas Aerie light from pure digestion bred,And temperat vapors bland, which th' only soundOf leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,Lightly dispers'd, and the shrill Matin SongOf Birds on every bough; so much the moreHis wonder was to find unwak'nd EveWith Tresses discompos'd, and glowing Cheek,As through unquiet rest: he on his sideLeaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial LoveHung over her enamour'd, and beheldBeautie, which whether waking or asleep,Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voiceMilde, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus.   AwakeMy fairest, my espous'd, my latest found,Heav'ns last best gift, my ever new delight,Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh fieldCalls us, we lose the prime, to mark how springOur tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,What drops the Myrrhe, and what the balmie Reed,How Nature paints her colours, how the BeeSits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.Such whispering wak'd her, but with startl'd eyeOn Adam, whom imbracing, thus she spake.O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I seeThy face, and Morn return'd, for I this Night,Such night till this I never pass'd, have dream'd,If dream'd, not as I oft am wont, of thee,Works of day pass't, or morrows next designe,But of offence and trouble, which my mindKnew never till this irksom night;   methoughtClose at mine ear one call'd me forth to walkWith gentle voice, I though it thine; it said,Why sleepst thou Eve?   now is the pleasant time,The cool, the silent, save where silence yieldsTo the night-warbling Bird, that now awakeTunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reignesFull Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleasing lightShadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,If none regard; Heav'n wakes with all his eyes,Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,In whose sight all things joy, with ravishmentAttracted by thy beauty still to gaze.I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;To find thee I directed then my walk;And on, methought, alone I pass'd through waysThat brought me on a sudden to the TreeOf interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem'd,Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:And as I wondring lookt, beside it stoodOne shap'd and wing'd like one of those from Heav'nBy us oft seen; his dewie locks distill'dAmbrosia; on that Tree he also gaz'd;And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg'd,Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis'd?Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste?Forbid who will, none shall from me withholdLonger thy offerd good, why else set here?This said he paus'd not, but with ventrous ArmeHe pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil'dAt such bold words voucht with a deed so bold:But he thus overjoy'd, O Fruit Divine,Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt,Forbidd'n here, it seems, as onely fitFor God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:And why not Gods of Men, since good, the moreCommunicated, more abundant growes,The Author not impair'd, but honourd more?Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic Eve,Partake thou also; happie though thou art,Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be:Taste this, and be henceforth among the GodsThy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimesAscend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and seeWhat life the Gods live there, and such live thou.So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,Even to my mouth of that same fruit held partWhich he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smellSo quick'nd appetite, that I, methought,Could not but taste.   Forthwith up to the CloudsWith him I flew, and underneath beheldThe Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wideAnd various: wondring at my flight and changeTo this high exaltation; suddenlyMy Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak'dTo find this but a dream!   Thus Eve her NightRelated, and thus Adam answerd sad.Best image of my self and dearer half,The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleepAffects me equally; nor can I likeThis uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear;Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,Created pure.   But know that in the SouleAre many lesser Faculties that serveReason as chief; among these Fansie nextHer office holds; of all external things,Which the five watchful Senses represent,She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, framesAll what we affirm or what deny, and callOur knowledge or opinion; then retiresInto her private Cell when Nature rests,Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakesTo imitate her; but misjoyning shapes,Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.Som such resemblances methinks I findOf our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,But with addition strange; yet be not sad.Evil into the mind of God or ManMay come or go, so unapprov'd, and leaveNo spot or blame behind: Which gives me hopeThat what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream,Waking thou never wilt consent to do.Be not disheart'nd then, nor cloud those looksThat wont to be more chearful and sereneThen when fair Morning first smiles on the World,And let us to our fresh imployments riseAmong the Groves, the Fountains, and the FloursThat open now thir choicest bosom'd smellsReservd from night, and kept for thee in store.So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard,But silently a gentle tear let fallFrom either eye, and wip'd them with her haire;Two other precious drops that ready stood,Each in thir Chrystal sluce, hee ere they fellKiss'd as the gracious signs of sweet remorseAnd pious awe, that feard to have offended.So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste.But first from under shadie arborous roof,Soon as they forth were come to open sightOf day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risenWith wheels yet hov'ring o're the Ocean brim,Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray,Discovering in wide Lantskip all the EastOf Paradise and Edens happie Plains,Lowly they bow'd adoring, and beganThir Orisons, each Morning duly paidIn various style, for neither various styleNor holy rapture wanted they to praiseThir Maker, in fit strains pronounc't or sungUnmeditated, such prompt eloquenceFlowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,More tuneable then needed Lute or HarpTo add more sweetness, and they thus began.These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,Almightie, thine this universal Frame,Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!Unspeakable, who first above these HeavensTo us invisible or dimly seenIn these thy lowest works, yet these declareThy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light,Angels, for yee behold him, and with songsAnd choral symphonies, Day without Night,Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav'n,On Earth joyn all ye Creatures to extollHim first, him last, him midst, and without end.Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night,If better thou belong not to the dawn,Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling MornWith thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy SpheareWhile day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule,Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praiseIn thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,And when high Noon hast gaind, and when thou fallst.Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli'stWith the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies,And yee five other wandring Fires that moveIn mystic Dance not without Song, resoundHis praise, who out of Darkness call'd up Light,Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birthOf Natures Womb, that in quaternion runPerpetual Circle, multiform; and mixAnd nourish all things, let your ceasless changeVarie to our great Maker still new praise.Ye Mists and Exhalations that now riseFrom Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey,Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,In honour to the Worlds great Author rise;Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie,Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers,Rising or falling still advance his praise.His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,That singing up to Heaven gate ascend,Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walkThe Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven,To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shadeMade vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.Hail universal Lord, be bounteous stillTo give us onely good; and if the nightHave gathered aught of evil or conceald,Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.So pray'd they innocent, and to thir thoughtsFirm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm.On to thir mornings rural work they hasteAmong sweet dewes and flours; where any rowOf Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farrThir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to checkFruitless imbraces: or they led the VineTo wed her Elm; she spous'd about him twinesHer mariageable arms, and with her bringsHer dowr th' adopted Clusters, to adornHis barren leaves.   Them thus imploid beheldWith pittie Heav'ns high King, and to him call'dRaphael, the sociable Spirit, that deign'dTo travel with Tobias, and secur'dHis marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid.Raphael, said hee, thou hear'st what stir on EarthSatan from Hell scap't through the darksom GulfHath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbdThis night the human pair, how he designesIn them at once to ruin all mankind.Go therefore, half this day as friend with friendConverse with Adam, in what Bowre or shadeThou find'st him from the heat of Noon retir'd,To respit his day-labour with repast,Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,As may advise him of his happie state,Happiness in his power left free to will,Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,Yet mutable; whence warne him to bewareHe swerve not too secure: tell him withallHis danger, and from whom, what enemieLate falln himself from Heav'n, is plotting nowThe fall of others from like state of bliss;By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,But by deceit and lies; this let him know,Least wilfully transgressing he pretendSurprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.So spake th' Eternal Father, and fulfilldAll Justice: nor delaid the winged SaintAfter his charge receivd, but from amongThousand Celestial Ardors, where he stoodVaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing lightFlew through the midst of Heav'n; th' angelic QuiresOn each hand parting, to his speed gave wayThrough all th' Empyreal road; till at the GateOf Heav'n arriv'd, the gate self-opend wideOn golden Hinges turning, as by workDivine the sov'ran Architect had fram'd.From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,Starr interpos'd, however small he sees,Not unconform to the other shining Globes,Earth and the Gard'n of God, with Cedars crowndAbove all Hills.   As when by night the GlassOf Galileo, less assur'd, observesImagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:Or Pilot from amidst the CycladesDelos or Samos first appeering kennsA cloudy spot.   Down thither prone in flightHe speeds, and through the vast Ethereal SkieSailes between worlds and worlds, with steddie wingNow on the polar windes, then with quick FannWinnows the buxom Air;   till within soareOf Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seemsA Phoenix, gaz'd by all, as that sole BiradWhen to enshrine his reliques in the Sun'sBright Temple, to Aegyptian Theb's he flies.At once on th' Eastern cliff of ParadiseHe lights, and to his proper shape returnsA Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shadeHis lineaments Divine; the pair that cladEach shoulder broad, came mantling o're his brestWith regal Ornament; the middle pairGirt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and roundSkirted his loines and thighes with downie GoldAnd colours dipt in Heav'n; the third his feetShaddowd from either heele with featherd maileSkie-tinctur'd grain.   Like Maia's son he stood,And shook his Plumes, that Heav'nly fragrance filldThe circuit wide.   Strait knew him all the BandsOf Angels under watch; and to his state,And to his message high in honour rise;For on som message high they guessd him bound.The glittering Tents he passd, and now is comeInto the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe,And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme;A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature hereWantond as in her prime, and plaid at willHer Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous bliss.Him through the spicie Forrest onward comAdam discernd, as in the dore he satOf his coole Bowre, while now the mounted SunShot down direct his fervid Raies to warmeEarths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs;And Eve within, due at her hour prepar'dFor dinner savourie fruits, of taste to pleaseTrue appetite, and not disrelish thirstOf nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream,Berrie or Grape: to whom thus Adam call'd.Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight beholdEastward among those Trees, what glorious shapeComes this way moving; seems another MornRis'n on mid-noon;   some great behest from Heav'nTo us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafeThis day to be our Guest.   But goe with speed,And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poureAbundance, fit to honour and receiveOur Heav'nly stranger; well we may affordOur givers thir own gifts, and large bestowFrom large bestowd, where Nature multipliesHer fertil growth, and by disburd'ning growsMore fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.To whom thus Eve.   Adam, earths hallowd mouldOf God inspir'd, small store will serve, where store,All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;Save what by frugal storing firmness gainsTo nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:But I will haste and from each bough and break,Each Plant and juciest Gourd will pluck such choiceTo entertain our Angel guest, as heeBeholding shall confess that here on EarthGod hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav'n.So saying, with dispatchful looks in hasteShe turns, on hospitable thoughts intentWhat choice to chuse for delicacie best,What order, so contriv'd as not to mixTastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bringTaste after taste upheld with kindliest change,Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalkWhatever Earth all-bearing Mother yieldsIn India East or West, or middle shoareIn Pontus or the Punic Coast, or whereAlcinous reign'd, fruit of all kindes, in coate,Rough, or smooth rin'd, or bearded husk, or shellShe gathers, Tribute large, and on the boardHeaps with unsparing hand; for drink the GrapeShe crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathesFrom many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prestShe tempers dulcet creams, nor these to holdWants her fit vessels pure, then strews the groundWith Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd.Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meetHis god-like Guest, walks forth, without more trainAccompani'd then with his own compleatPerfections, in himself was all his state,More solemn then the tedious pomp that waitsOn Princes, when thir rich Retinue longOf Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with GoldDazles the croud, and sets them all agape.Neerer his presence Adam though not awd,Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,As to a superior Nature, bowing low,Thus said.   Native of Heav'n, for other placeNone can then Heav'n such glorious shape contain;Since by descending from the Thrones above,Those happie places thou hast deignd a whileTo want, and honour these, voutsafe with usTwo onely, who yet by sov'ran gift possessThis spacious ground, in yonder shadie BowreTo rest, and what the Garden choicest bearsTo sit and taste, till this meridian heatBe over, and the Sun more coole decline.Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde.Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou suchCreated, or such place hast here to dwell,As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav'nTo visit thee; lead on then where thy BowreOreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning riseI have at will. So to the Silvan LodgeThey came, that like Pomona's Arbour smil'dWith flourets deck't and fragrant smells; but EveUndeckt, save with her self more lovely fairThen Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign'dOf three that in Mount Ida naked strove,Stood to entertain her guest from Heav'n; no vaileShee needed, Vertue-proof, no thought infirmeAlterd her cheek.   On whom the Angel HaileBestowd, the holy salutation us'dLong after to blest Marie, second Eve.Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful WombShall fill the World more numerous with thy SonsThen with these various fruits the Trees of GodHave heap'd this Table. Rais'd of grassie terfThir Table was, and mossie seats had round,And on her ample Square from side to sideAll Autumn pil'd, though Spring and Autumn hereDanc'd hand in hand.   A while discourse they hold;No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus beganOur Authour.   Heav'nly stranger, please to tasteThese bounties which our Nourisher, from whomAll perfet good unmeasur'd out, descends,To us for food and for delight hath caus'dThe Earth to yield; unsavourie food perhapsTo spiritual Natures; only this I know,That one Celestial Father gives to all.To whom the Angel.   Therefore what he gives(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in partSpiritual, may of purest Spirits be foundNo ingrateful food; and food alike those pureIntelligential substances requireAs doth your Rational; and both containWithin them every lower facultieOf sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,And corporeal to incorporeal turn.For know, whatever was created, needsTo be sustaind and fed; of ElementsThe grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those FiresEthereal, and as lowest first the Moon;Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg'dVapours not yet into her substance turnd.Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhaleFrom her moist Continent to higher Orbes.The Sun that light imparts to all, receivesFrom all his alimental recompenceIn humid exhalations, and at EvenSups with the Ocean: though in Heav'n the TreesOf life ambrosial frutage bear, and vinesYield Nectar, though from off the boughs each MornWe brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the groundCover'd with pearly grain: yet God hath hereVaried his bounty so with new delights,As may compare with Heaven; and to tasteThink not I shall be nice.   So down they sat,And to thir viands fell, nor seeminglyThe Angel, nor in mist, the common glossOf Theologians, but with keen dispatchOf real hunger, and concoctive heate.To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpiresThrough Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fireOf sooty coal the Empiric AlchimistCan turn, or holds it possible to turnMetals of drossiest Ore to perfet GoldAs from the Mine.   Mean while at Table EveMinisterd naked, and thir flowing cupsWith pleasant liquors crown'd:   O innocenceDeserving Paradise! if ever, then,Then had the Sons of God excuse to have binEnamour'd at that sight; but in those heartsLove unlibidinous reign'd, nor jealousieWas understood, the injur'd Lovers Hell.Thus when with meats and drinks they had suffic'd,Not burd'nd Nature, sudden mind aroseIn Adam, not to let th' occasion passGiven him by this great Conference to knowOf things above his World, and of thir beingWho dwell in Heav'n, whose excellence he sawTranscend his own so farr, whose radiant formsDivine effulgence, whose high Power so farExceeded human, and his wary speechThus to th' Empyreal Minister he fram'd.Inhabitant with God, now know I wellThy favour, in this honour done to man,Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf'tTo enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,As that more willingly thou couldst not seemAs Heav'ns high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?To whom the winged Hierarch repli'd.O Adam, one Almightie is, from whomAll things proceed, and up to him return,If not deprav'd from good, created allSuch to perfection, one first matter all,Indu'd with various forms various degreesOf substance, and in things that live, of life;But more refin'd, more spiritous, and pure,As neerer to him plac't or neerer tendingEach in thir several active Sphears assignd,Till body up to spirit work, in boundsProportiond to each kind.   So from the rootSprings lighter the green stalk, from thence the leavesMore aerie, last the bright consummate floureSpirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruitMans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'dTo vital Spirits aspire, to animal,To intellectual, give both life and sense,Fansie and understanding, whence the SouleReason receives, and reason is her being,Discursive, or Intuitive; discourseIs oftest yours, the latter most is ours,Differing but in degree, of kind the same.Wonder not then, what God for you saw goodIf I refuse not, but convert, as you,To proper substance; time may come when menWith Angels may participate, and findNo inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:And from these corporal nutriments perhapsYour bodies may at last turn all to Spirit,Improv'd by tract of time, and wingd ascendEthereal, as wee, or may at choiceHere or in Heav'nly Paradises dwell;If ye be found obedient, and retainUnalterably firm his love entireWhose progenie you are.   Mean while enjoyYour fill what happiness this happie stateCan comprehend, incapable of more.To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli'd,O favourable spirit, propitious guest,Well hast thou taught the way that might directOur knowledge, and the scale of Nature setFrom center to circumference, whereonIn contemplation of created thingsBy steps we may ascend to God.   But say,What meant that caution joind, if ye be foundObedient"
"

ALL night the dreadless Angel unpursu'd Through Heav'ns wide Champain held his way, till Morn, Wak't by the circling Hours, with rosie hand Unbarr'd the gates of Light.   There is a Cave Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne, Where light and darkness in perpetual round Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heav'n Grateful vicissitude, like Day and Night; Light issues forth, and at the other dore Obsequious darkness enters, till her houre To veile the Heav'n, though darkness there might well Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn Such as in highest Heav'n, arrayd in Gold Empyreal, from before her vanisht Night, Shot through with orient Beams: when all the Plain Coverd with thick embatteld Squadrons bright, Chariots and flaming Armes, and fierie Steeds Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view: Warr he perceav'd, warr in procinct, and found Already known what he for news had thought To have reported: gladly then he mixt Among those friendly Powers who him receav'd With joy and acclamations loud, that one That of so many Myriads fall'n, yet one Returnd not lost: On to the sacred hill They led him high applauded, and present Before the seat supream; from whence a voice From midst a Golden Cloud thus milde was heard. Servant of God, well done, well hast thou fought The better fight, who single hast maintaind Against revolted multitudes the Cause Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Armes; And for the testimonie of Truth hast born Universal reproach, far worse to beare Then violence: for this was all thy care To stand approv'd in sight of God, though Worlds Judg'd thee perverse: the easier conquest now Remains thee, aided by this host of friends, Back on thy foes more glorious to return Then scornd thou didst depart, and to subdue By force, who reason for thir Law refuse, Right reason for thir Law, and for thir King Messiah, who by right of merit Reigns. Go Michael of Celestial Armies Prince, And thou in Military prowess next Gabriel, lead forth to Battel these my Sons Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints By Thousands and by Millions rang'd for fight; Equal in number to that Godless crew Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heav'n Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss, Into thir place of punishment, the Gulf Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide His fiery Chaos to receave thir fall. So spake the Sovran voice, and Clouds began To darken all the Hill, and smoak to rowl In duskie wreathes, reluctant flames, the signe Of wrauth awak't: nor with less dread the loud Ethereal Trumpet from on high gan blow: At which command the Powers Militant, That stood for Heav'n, in mighty Quadrate joyn""d Of Union irresistible, mov'd on In silence thir bright Legions, to the sound Of instrumental Harmonie that breath'd Heroic Ardor to advent'rous deeds Under thir God-like Leaders, in the Cause Of God and his Messiah.   On they move Indissolubly firm; nor obvious Hill, Nor streit'ning Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides Thir perfet ranks; for high above the ground Thir march was, and the passive Air upbore Thir nimble tread, as when the total kind Of Birds in orderly array on wing Came summond over Eden to receive Thir names of thee; so over many a tract Of Heav'n they march'd, and many a Province wide Tenfold the length of this terrene: at last Farr in th' Horizon to the North appeer'd From skirt to skirt a fierie Region, stretcht In battailous aspect, and neerer view Bristl'd with upright beams innumerable Of rigid Spears, and Helmets throng'd, and Shields Various, with boastful Argument portraid, The banded Powers of Satan hasting on With furious expedition; for they weend That self same day by fight, or by surprize To win the Mount of God, and on his Throne To set the envier of his State, the proud Aspirer, but thir thoughts prov'd fond and vain In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd At first, that Angel should with Angel warr, And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet So oft in Festivals of joy and love Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire Hymning th' Eternal Father: but the shout Of Battel now began, and rushing sound Of onset ended soon each milder thought. High in the midst exalted as a God Th' Apostat in his Sun-bright Chariot sate Idol of Majestie Divine, enclos'd With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields; Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now 'Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left, A dreadful intervall, and Front to Front Presented stood in terrible array Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van, On the rough edge of battel ere it joyn,d, Satan with vast and haughtie strides advanc't, Came towring, armd in Adamant and Gold; Abdiel that sight endur'd not, where he stood Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds, And thus his own undaunted heart explores. O Heav'n! that such resemblance of the Highest Should yet remain, where faith and realtie Remain not; wherfore should not strength and might There fail where Vertue fails, or weakest prove Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable? His puissance, trusting in th' Almightie's aide, I mean to try, whose Reason I have tri'd Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just, That he who in debate of Truth hath won, Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike Victor; though brutish that contest and foule, When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so Most reason is that Reason overcome. So pondering, and from his armed Peers Forth stepping opposite, half way he met His daring foe, at this prevention more Incens't, and thus securely him defi'd. Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reacht The highth of thy aspiring unoppos'd, The Throne of God unguarded, and his side Abandond at the terror of thy Power Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain Against th' Omnipotent to rise in Arms; Who out of smallest things could without end Have rais'd incessant Armies to defeat Thy folly; or with solitarie hand Reaching beyond all limit at one blow Unaided could have finisht thee, and whelmd Thy Legions under darkness; but thou seest All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith Prefer, and Pietie to God, though then To thee not visible, when I alone Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent From all: my Sect thou seest, now learn too late How few somtimes may know, when thousands err. Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance Thus answerd.   Ill for thee, but in wisht houre Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst From flight, seditious Angel, to receave Thy merited reward, the first assay Of this right hand provok't, since first that tongue Inspir'd with contradiction durst oppose A third part of the Gods, in Synod met Thir Deities to assert, who while they feel Vigour Divine within them, can allow Omnipotence to none.   But well thou comst Before thy fellows, ambitious to win From me som Plume, that thy success may show Destruction to the rest: this pause between (Unanswerd least thou boast) to let thee know; At first I thought that Libertie and Heav'n To heav'nly Soules had bin all one; but now I see that most through sloth had rather serve, Ministring Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song; Such hast thou arm'd, the Ministrelsie of Heav'n, Servilitie with freedom to contend, As both thir deeds compar'd this day shall prove. To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern repli'd. Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find Of erring, from the path of truth remote: Unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name Of Servitude to serve whom God ordains, Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same, When he who rules is worthiest, and excells Them whom he governs.   This is servitude, To serve th' unwise, or him who hath rebelld Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee, Thy self not free, but to thy self enthrall'd; Yet leudly dar'st our ministring upbraid. Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let mee serve In Heav'n God ever blest, and his Divine Behests obey, worthiest to be obey'd, Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while From mee returnd, as erst thou saidst, from flight, This greeting on thy impious Crest receive. So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell On the proud Crest of Satan, that no sight, Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee His massie Spear upstaid; as if on Earth Winds under ground or waters forcing way Sidelong, had push't a Mountain from his seat Half sunk with all his Pines.   Amazement seis'd The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see Thus foil'd thir mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout, Presage of Victorie and fierce desire Of Battel: whereat Michael bid sound Th' Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joyn'd The horrid shock: now storming furie rose, And clamour such as heard in Heav'n till now Was never, Arms on Armour clashing bray'd Horrible discord, and the madding Wheeles Of brazen Chariots rag'd; dire was the noise Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew, And flying vaulted either Host with fire. So under fierie Cope together rush'd Both Battels maine, with ruinous assault And inextinguishable rage; all Heav'n Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth Had to her Center shook.   What wonder? when Millions of fierce encountring Angels fought On either side, the least of whom could weild These Elements, and arm him with the force Of all thir Regions: how much more of Power Armie against Armie numberless to raise Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb, Though not destroy, thir happie Native seat; Had not th' Eternal King Omnipotent From his strong hold of Heav'n high over-rul'd And limited thir might; though numberd such As each divided Legion might have seemd A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand A Legion; led in fight, yet Leader seemd Each Warriour single as in Chief, expert When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway Of Battel, open when, and when to close The ridges of grim Warr; no thought of flight, None of retreat, no unbecoming deed That argu'd fear; each on himself reli'd, As onely in his arm the moment lay Of victorie; deeds of eternal fame Were don, but infinite: for wide was spred That Warr and various; somtimes on firm ground A standing fight, then soaring on main wing Tormented all the Air; all Air seemd then Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale The Battel hung; till Satan, who that day Prodigious power had shewn, and met in Armes No equal, raunging through the dire attack Of fighting Seraphim confus'd, at length Saw where the Sword of Michael smote, and fell'd Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand He hasted, and oppos'd the rockie Orb Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield A vast circumference:   At his approach The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toile Surceas'd, and glad as hoping here to end Intestine War in Heav'n, the arch foe subdu'd Or Captive drag'd in Chains, with hostile frown And visage all enflam'd first thus began. Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt, Unnam'd in Heav'n, now plenteous, as thou seest These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all, Though heaviest by just measure on thy self And thy adherents: how hast thou disturb d Heav'ns blessed peace, and into Nature brought Miserie, uncreated till the crime Of thy Rebellion? how hast thou instill'd Thy malice into thousands, once upright And faithful, now prov'd false.   But think not here To trouble Holy Rest; Heav'n casts thee out From all her Confines.   Heav'n the seat of bliss Brooks not the works of violence and Warr. Hence then, and evil go with thee along Thy ofspring, to the place of evil, Hell, Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broiles, Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doome, Or som more sudden vengeance wing'd from God Precipitate thee with augmented paine. So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus The Adversarie.   Nor think thou with wind Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds Thou canst not.   Hast thou turnd the least of these To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise Unvanquisht, easier to transact with mee That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats To chase me hence? erre not that so shall end The strife which thou call'st evil, but wee style The strife of Glorie: which we mean to win, Or turn this Heav'n it self into the Hell Thou fablest, here however to dwell free, If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force, And join him nam'd Almighty to thy aid, I flie not, but have sought thee farr and nigh. They ended parle, and both addrest for fight Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue Of Angels, can relate, or to what things Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift Human imagination to such highth Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd, Stood they or mov'd, in stature, motion, arms Fit to decide the Empire of great Heav'n. Now wav'd thir fierie Swords, and in the Aire Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns thir Shields Blaz'd opposite, while expectation stood In horror; from each hand with speed retir'd Where erst was thickest fight, th' Angelic throng, And left large field, unsafe within the wind Of such commotion, such as to set forth Great things by small, If Natures concord broke, Among the Constellations warr were sprung, Two Planets rushing from aspect maligne Of fiercest opposition in mid Skie, Should combat, and thir jarring Sphears confound. Together both with next to Almightie Arme, Uplifted imminent one stroke they aim'd That might determine, and not need repeate, As not of power, at once; nor odds appeerd In might or swift prevention; but the sword Of Michael from the Armorie of God Was giv'n him temperd so, that neither keen Nor solid might resist that edge: it met The sword of Satan with steep force to smite Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid, But with swift wheele reverse, deep entring shar'd All his right side; then Satan first knew pain, And writh'd him to and fro convolv'd; so sore The griding sword with discontinuous wound Pass'd through him, but th' Ethereal substance clos'd Not long divisible, and from the gash A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flow'd Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed, And all his Armour staind ere while so bright. Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run By Angels many and strong, who interpos'd Defence, while others bore him on thir Shields Back to his Chariot; where it stood retir'd From off the files of warr; there they him laid Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame To find himself not matchless, and his pride Humbl'd by such rebuke, so farr beneath His confidence to equal God in power. Yet soon he heal'd; for Spirits that live throughout Vital in every part, not as frail man In Entrailes, Heart or Head, Liver or Reines; Cannot but by annihilating die; Nor in thir liquid texture mortal wound Receive, no more then can the fluid Aire: All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Eare, All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please, They Limb themselves, and colour, shape or size Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare. Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought, And with fierce Ensignes pierc'd the deep array Of Moloc furious King, who him defi'd, And at his Chariot wheeles to drag him bound Threatn'd, nor from the Holie One of Heav'n Refrein'd his tongue blasphemous; but anon Down clov'n to the waste, with shatterd Armes And uncouth paine fled bellowing.   On each wing Uriel and Raphael his vaunting foe, Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd, Vanquish'd Adramelec, and Asmadai, Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods Disdain'd, but meaner thoughts learnd in thir flight, Mangl'd with gastly wounds through Plate and Maile, Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy The Atheist crew, but with redoubl'd blow Ariel and Arioc, and the violence Of Ramiel scorcht and blasted overthrew. I might relate of thousands, and thir names Eternize here on Earth; but those elect Angels contented with thir fame in Heav'n Seek not the praise of men: the other sort In might though wondrous and in Acts of Warr, Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doome Canceld from Heav'n and sacred memorie, Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell. For strength from Truth divided and from Just, Illaudable, naught merits but dispraise And ignominie, yet to glorie aspires Vain glorious, and through infamie seeks fame: Therfore Eternal silence be thir doome. And now thir Mightiest quelld, the battel swerv'd, With many an inrode gor'd; deformed rout Enter'd, and foul disorder; all the ground With shiverd armour strow'n, and on a heap Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd And fierie foaming Steeds; what stood, recoyld Orewearied, through the faint Satanic Host Defensive scarse, or with pale fear surpris'd, Then first with fear surpris'd and sense of paine Fled ignominious, to such evil brought By sin of disobedience, till that hour Not liable to fear or flight or paine. Far otherwise th' inviolable Saints In Cubic Phalanx firm advanc't entire, Invulnerable, impenitrably arm'd: Such high advantages thir innocence Gave them above thir foes, not to have sinnd, Not to have disobei'd; in fight they stood Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pain'd By wound, though from thir place by violence mov'd. Now Night her course began, and over Heav'n Inducing darkness, grateful truce impos'd, And silence on the odious dinn of Warr: Under her Cloudie covert both retir'd, Victor and Vanquisht: on the foughten field Michael and his Angels prevalent Encamping, plac'd in Guard thir Watches round, Cherubic waving fires: on th' other part Satan with his rebellious disappeerd, Far in the dark dislodg'd, and void of rest, His Potentates to Councel call'd by night; And in the midst thus undismai'd began. O now in danger tri'd, now known in Armes Not to be overpowerd, Companions deare, Found worthy not of Libertie alone, Too mean pretense, but what we more affect, Honour, Dominion, Glorie, and renowne, Who have sustaind one day in doubtful fight (And if one day, why not Eternal dayes?) What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send Against us from about his Throne, and judg'd Sufficient to subdue us to his will, But proves not so: then fallible, it seems, Of future we may deem him, though till now Omniscient thought.   True is, less firmly arm'd, Some disadvantage we endur'd and paine, Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd, Since now we find this our Empyreal form Incapable of mortal injurie Imperishable, and though peirc'd with wound, Soon closing, and by native vigour heal'd. Of evil then so small as easie think The remedie; perhaps more valid Armes, Weapons more violent, when next we meet, May serve to better us, and worse our foes, Or equal what between us made the odds, In Nature none: if other hidden cause Left them Superiour, while we can preserve Unhurt our mindes, and understanding sound, Due search and consultation will disclose. He sat; and in th' assembly next upstood Nisroc of Principalities the prime; As one he stood escap't from cruel fight, Sore toild, his riv'n Armes to havoc hewn, And cIoudie in aspect thus answering spake. Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard For Gods, and too unequal work we find Against unequal armes to fight in paine, Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes Valour or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands Of Mightiest.   Sense of pleasure we may well Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, But live content, which is the calmest life: But pain is perfet miserie, the worst Of evils, and excessive, overturnes All patience.   He who therefore can invent With what more forcible we may offend Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arme Our selves with like defence, to me deserves No less then for deliverance what we owe. Whereto with look compos'd Satan repli'd. Not uninvented that, which thou aright Believst so main to our success, I bring; Which of us who beholds the bright surface Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand, This continent of spacious Heav'n, adornd With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gemms & Gold, Whose Eye so superficially surveyes These things, as not to mind from whence they grow Deep under ground, materials dark and crude, Of spiritous and fierie spume, till toucht With Heav'ns ray, and temperd they shoot forth So beauteous, op'ning to the ambient light. These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep Shall yield us pregnant with infernal flame, Which into hallow Engins long and round Thick-rammd, at th' other bore with touch of fire Dilated and infuriate shall send forth From far with thundring noise among our foes Such implements of mischief as shall dash To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawne, Effect shall end our wish.   Mean while revive; Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird. He ended, and his words thir drooping chere Enlightn'd, and thir languisht hope reviv'd. Th' invention all admir'd, and each, how hee To be th' inventer miss'd, so easie it seemd Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought Impossible: yet haply of thy Race In future dayes, if Malice should aboun, Some one intent on mischief, or inspir'd With dev'lish machination might devise Like instrument to plague the Sons of men For sin, on warr and mutual slaughter bent. Forthwith from Councel to the work they flew, None arguing stood, innumerable hands Were ready, in a moment up they turnd Wide the Celestial soile, and saw beneath Th' originals of Nature in thir crude Conception; Sulphurous and Nitrous Foame They found, they mingl'd, and with suttle Art, Concocted and adusted they reduc'd To blackest grain, and into store convey'd: Part hidd'n veins diggd up (nor hath this Earth Entrails unlike) of Mineral and Stone, Whereof to found thir Engins and thir Balls Of missive ruin; part incentive reed Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. So all ere day-spring, under conscious Night Secret they finish'd, and in order set, With silent circumspection unespi'd. Now when fair Morn Orient in Heav'n appeerd Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood Of Golden Panoplie, refulgent Host, Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scoure, Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe, Where lodg'd, or whither fled, or if for fight, In motion or in alt: him soon they met Under spred Ensignes moving nigh, in slow But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, Came flying, and in mid Aire aloud thus cri'd. Arme, Warriours, Arme for fight, the foe at hand, Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud He comes, and settl'd in his face I see Sad resolution and secure: let each His Adamantine coat gird well, and each Fit well his Helme, gripe fast his orbed Shield, Born eevn or high, for this day will pour down, If I conjecture aught, no drizling showr, But ratling storm of Arrows barbd with fire. So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon In order, quit of all impediment; Instant without disturb they took Allarm, And onward move Embattelld; when behold Not distant far with heavie pace the Foe Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube Training his devilish Enginrie, impal'd On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep, To hide the fraud.   At interview both stood A while, but suddenly at head appeerd Satan: And thus was heard Commanding loud. Vanguard, to Right and Left the Front unfould; That all may see who hate us, how we seek Peace and composure, and with open brest Stand readie to receive them, if they like Our overture, and turn not back perverse; But that I doubt, however witness Heaven, Heav'n witness thou anon, while we discharge Freely our part; yee who appointed stand Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch What we propound, and loud that all may hear. So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front Divided, and to either Flank retir'd. Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange, A triple mounted row of Pillars laid On Wheels (for like to Pillars most they seem'd Or hollow'd bodies made of Oak or Firr With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain fell'd) Brass, Iron, Stonie mould, had not thir mouthes With hideous orifice gap't on us wide, Portending hollow truce; at each behind A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed Stood waving tipt with fire; while we suspense, Collected stood within our thoughts amus'd, Not long, for sudden all at once thir Reeds Put forth, and to a narrow vent appli'd With nicest touch.   Immediate in a flame, But soon obscur'd with smoak, all Heav'n appeerd, From those deep throated Engins belcht, whose roar Emboweld with outragious noise the Air, And all her entrails tore, disgorging foule Thir devilish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host Level'd, with such impetuous furie smote, That whom they hit, none on thir feet might stand, Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rowl'd; The sooner for thir Arms, unarm'd they might Have easily as Spirits evaded swift By quick contraction or remove; but now Foule dissipation follow'd and forc't rout; Nor serv'd it to relax thir serried files. What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse Repeated, and indecent overthrow Doubl'd, would render them yet more despis'd, And to thir foes a laughter; for in view Stood rankt of Seraphim another row In posture to displode thir second tire Of Thunder: back defeated to return They worse abhorr'd.   Satan beheld thir plight, And to his Mates thus in derision call'd. O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud? Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee, To entertain them fair with open Front And Brest, (what could we more?) propounded terms Of composition, strait they chang'd thir minds, Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell, As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd Somwhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps For joy of offerd peace: but I suppose If our proposals once again were heard We should compel them to a quick result. To whom thus Belial in like gamesom mood, Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight, Of hard contents, and full of force urg'd home, Such as we might perceive amus'd them all, And stumbl'd many, who receives them right, Had need from head to foot well understand; Not understood, this gift they have besides, They shew us when our foes walk not upright. So they among themselves in pleasant veine Stood scoffing, highthn'd in thir thoughts beyond All doubt of Victorie, eternal might To match with thir inventions they presum'd So easie, and of his Thunder made a scorn, And all his Host derided, while they stood A while in trouble; but they stood not long, Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose. Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power Which God hath in his mighty Angels plac'd) Thir Arms away they threw, and to the Hills (For Earth hath this variety from Heav'n Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale) Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew, From thir foundations loosning to and fro They pluckt the seated Hills with all thir load, Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops Up lifting bore them in thir hands: Amaze, Be sure, and terrour seis'd the rebel Host, When coming towards them so dread they saw The bottom of the Mountains upward turn'd, Till on those cursed Engins triple-row They saw them whelm'd, and all thir confidence Under the weight of Mountains buried deep, Themselves invaded next, and on thir heads Main Promontories flung, which in the Air Came shadowing, and opprest whole Legions arm'd, Thir armor help'd thir harm, crush't in and bruis'd Into thir substance pent, which wrought them pain Implacable, and many a dolorous groan, Long strugling underneath, ere they could wind Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown. The rest in imitation to like Armes Betook them, and the neighbouring Hills uptore; So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills Hurl'd to and fro with jaculation dire That under ground, they fought in dismal shade; Infernal noise; Warr seem'd a civil Game To this uproar; horrid confusion heapt Upon confusion rose: and now all Heav'n Had gon to wrack, with ruin overspred, Had not th' Almightie Father where he sits Shrin'd in his Sanctuarie of Heav'n secure, Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen This tumult, and permitted all, advis'd: That his great purpose he might so fulfill, To honour his Anointed Son aveng'd Upon his enemies, and to declare All power on him transferr'd: whence to his Son Th' Assessor of his Throne he thus began. Effulgence of my Glorie, Son belov'd, Son in whose face invisible is beheld Visibly, what by Deitie I am, And in whose hand what by Decree I doe, Second Omnipotence, two dayes are past, Two dayes, as we compute the dayes of Heav'n, Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame These disobedient; sore hath been thir fight, As likeliest was, when two such Foes met arm'd; For to themselves I left them, and thou knowst, Equal in their Creation they were form'd, Save what sin hath impaird, which yet hath wrought Insensibly, for I suspend thir doom; Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last Endless, and no solution will be found: Warr wearied hath perform'd what Warr can do, And to disorder'd rage let loose the reines, With Mountains as with Weapons arm'd, which makes Wild work in Heav'n, and dangerous to the maine. Two dayes are therefore past, the third is thine; For thee I have ordain'd it, and thus farr Have sufferd, that the Glorie may be thine Of ending this great Warr, since none but Thou Can end it.   Into thee such Vertue and Grace Immense I have transfus'd, that all may know In Heav'n and Hell thy Power above compare, And this perverse Commotion governd thus, To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir Of all things, to be Heir and to be King By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right. Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might, Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheeles That shake Heav'ns basis, bring forth all my Warr, My Bow and Thunder, my Almightie Arms Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh; Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out From all Heav'ns bounds into the utter Deep: There let them learn, as likes them, to despise God and Messiah his anointed King. He said, and on his Son with Rayes direct Shon full, he all his Father full expresst Ineffably into his face receiv'd, And thus the filial Godhead answering spake. O Father, O Supream of heav'nly Thrones, First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou alwayes seekst To glorifie thy Son, I alwayes thee, As is most just; this I my Glorie account, My exaltation, and my whole delight, That thou in me well pleas'd, declarst thy will Fulfill'd, which to fulfil is all my bliss. Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume, And gladlier shall resign, when in the end Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee For ever, and in mee all whom thou lov'st: But whom thou hat'st, I hate, and can put on Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on, Image of thee in all things; and shall soon, Armd with thy might, rid heav'n of these rebell'd, To thir prepar'd ill Mansion driven down To chains of darkness, and th' undying Worm, That from thy just obedience could revolt, Whom to obey is happiness entire. Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from th' impure Farr separate, circling thy holy Mount Unfained Halleluiahs to thee sing, Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief. So said, he o're his Scepter bowing, rose From the right hand of Glorie where he sate, And the third sacred Morn began to shine Dawning through Heav'n: forth rush'd with whirlwind sound The Chariot of Paternal Deitie, Flashing thick flames, Wheele within Wheele undrawn, It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyd By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each Had wondrous, as with Starrs thir bodies all And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the wheels Of Beril, and careering Fires between; Over thir heads a chrystal Firmament, Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure Amber, and colours of the showrie Arch. Hee in Celestial Panoplie all armd Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought, Ascended, at his right hand Victorie Sate Eagle-wing'd, beside him hung his Bow And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stor'd, And from about him fierce Effusion rowld Of smoak and bickering flame, and sparkles dire; Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints, He onward came, farr off his coming shon, And twentie thousand (I thir number heard) Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen: Hee on the wings of Cherub rode sublime On the Chrystallin Skie, in Saphir Thron'd. Illustrious farr and wide, but by his own First seen, them unexpected joy surpriz'd, When the great Ensign of Messiah blaz'd Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heav'n: Under whose conduct Michael soon reduc'd His Armie, circumfus'd on either Wing, Under thir Head imbodied all in one. Before him Power Divine his way prepar'd; At his command the uprooted Hills retir'd Each to his place, they heard his voice and went Obsequious, Heav'n his wonted face renewd, And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smil'd. This saw his hapless Foes but stood obdur'd, And to rebellious fight rallied thir Powers Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. In heav'nly Spirits could such perverseness dwell? But to convince the proud what Signs availe, Or Wonders move th' obdurate to relent? They hard'nd more by what might most reclame, Grieving to see his Glorie, at the sight Took envie, and aspiring to his highth, Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud Weening to prosper, and at length prevaile Against God and Messiah, or to fall In universal ruin last, and now To final Battel drew, disdaining flight, Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God To all his Host on either hand thus spake. Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand Ye Angels arm'd, this day from Battel rest; Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause, And as ye have receivd, so have ye don Invincibly; but of this cursed crew The punishment to other hand belongs, Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints; Number to this dayes work is not ordain'd Nor multitude, stand onely and behold Gods indignation on these Godless pourd By mee, not you but mee they have despis'd, Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage, Because the Father, t' whom in Heav'n supream Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains, Hath honourd me according to his will. Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assig'n'd; That they may have thir wish, to trie with mee In Battel which the stronger proves, they all, Or I alone against them, since by strength They measure all, of other excellence Not emulous, nor care who them excells; Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe. So spake the Son, and into terrour chang'd His count'nance too severe to be beheld And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies. At once the Four spred out thir Starrie wings With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbes Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host. Hee on his impious Foes right onward drove, Gloomie as Night; under his burning Wheeles The stedfast Empyrean shook throughout, All but the Throne it self of God.   Full soon Among them he arriv'd; in his right hand Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent Before him, such as in thir Soules infix'd Plagues; they astonisht all resistance lost, All courage; down thir idle weapons drop'd; O're Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, That wisht the Mountains now might be again Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire. Nor less on either side tempestuous fell His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Foure, Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels Distinct alike with multitude of eyes, One Spirit in them rul'd, and every eye Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire Among th' accurst, that witherd all thir strength, And of thir wonted vigour left them draind, Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall'n. Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check'd His Thunder in mid Volie, for he meant Not to destroy, but root them out of Heav'n: The overthrown he rais'd, and as a Heard Of Goats or timerous flock together throngd Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursu'd With terrors and with furies to the bounds And Chrystal wall of Heav'n, which op'ning wide, Rowld inward, and a spacious Gap disclos'd Into the wastful Deep; the monstrous sight Strook them with horror backward, but far worse Urg'd them behind; headlong themselves they threw Down from the verge of Heav'n, Eternal wrauth Burnt after them to the bottomless pit. Hell heard th' unsufferable noise, Hell saw Heav'n ruining from Heav'n and would have fled Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. Nine dayes they fell; confounded Chaos roard, And felt tenfold confusion in thir fall Through his wilde Anarchie, so huge a rout Incumberd him with ruin: Hell at last Yawning receavd them whole, and on them clos'd, Hell thir fit habitation fraught with fire Unquenchable, the house of woe and paine. Disburd'nd Heav'n rejoic'd, and soon repaird Her mural breach, returning whence it rowld. Sole Victor from th' expulsion of his Foes Messiah his triumphal Chariot turnd: To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood Eye witnesses of his Almightie Acts, With Jubilie advanc'd; and as they went, Shaded with branching Palme, each order bright, Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King, Son, Heir, and Lord, to him Dominion giv'n, Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode Triumphant through mid Heav'n, into the Courts And Temple of his migihtie Father Thron'd On high: who into Glorie him receav'd, Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss. Thus measuring things in Heav'n by things on Earth At thy request, and that thou maist beware By what is past, to thee I have reveal'd What might have else to human Race bin hid; The discord which befel, and Warr in Heav'n Among th' Angelic Powers, and the deep fall Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld With Satan, hee who envies now thy state, Who now is plotting how he may seduce Thee also from obedience, that with him Bereavd of happiness thou maist partake His punishment, Eternal miserie; Which would be all his solace and revenge, As a despite don against the most High, Thee once to gaine Companion of his woe. But list'n not to his Temptations, warne Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard By terrible Example the reward Of disobedience; firm they might have stood, Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.

"
"

THE Angel ended, and in Adams Eare So Charming left his voice, that he a while Thought him still speaking, still stood fixt to hear; Then as new wak't thus gratefully repli'd. What thanks sufficient, or what recompence Equal have I to render thee, Divine Hystorian, who thus largely hast allayd The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf't This friendly condescention to relate Things else by me unsearchable, now heard With wonder, but delight, and, as is due, With glorie attributed to the high Creator; something yet of doubt remaines, Which onely thy solution can resolve. When I behold this goodly Frame, this World Of Heav'n and Earth consisting, and compute, Thir magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a graine, An Atom, with the Firmament compar'd And all her numberd Starrs, that seem to rowle Spaces incomprehensible (for such Thir distance argues and thir swift return Diurnal) meerly to officiate light Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, One day and night; in all thir vast survey Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire, How Nature wise and frugal could commit Such disproportions, with superfluous hand So many nobler Bodies to create, Greater so manifold to this one use, For aught appeers, and on thir Orbs impose Such restless revolution day by day Repeated, while the sedentarie Earth, That better might with farr less compass move, Serv'd by more noble then her self, attaines Her end without least motion, and receaves, As Tribute such a sumless journey brought Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light; Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number failes. So spake our Sire, and by his count'nance seemd Entring on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve Perceaving where she sat retir'd in sight, With lowliness Majestic from her seat, And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay, Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours, To visit how they prosper'd, bud and bloom, Her Nurserie; they at her coming sprung And toucht by her fair tendance gladlier grew. Yet went she not, as not with such discourse Delighted, or not capable her eare Of what was high: such pleasure she reserv'd, Adam relating, she sole Auditress; Her Husband the Relater she preferr'd Before the Angel, and of him to ask Chose rather; hee, she knew would intermix Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip Not Words alone pleas'd her.   O when meet now Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joyn'd? With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went; Not unattended, for on her as Queen A pomp of winning Graces waited still, And from about her shot Darts of desire Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight. And Raphael now to Adam's doubt propos'd Benevolent and facil thus repli'd. To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heav'n Is as the Book of God before thee set, Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learne His Seasons, Hours, or Dayes, or Months, or Yeares: This to attain, whether Heav'n move or Earth, Imports not, if thou reck'n right, the rest From Man or Angel the great Architect Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge His secrets to be scann'd by them who ought Rather admire; or if they list to try Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heav'ns Hath left to thir disputes, perhaps to move His laughter at thir quaint Opinions wide Hereafter, when they come to model Heav'n And calculate the Starrs, how they will weild The mightie frame, how build, unbuild, contrive To save appeerances, how gird the Sphear With Centric and Eccentric scribl'd o're, Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb: Alreadie by thy reasoning this I guess, Who art to lead thy ofspring, and supposest That bodies bright and greater should not serve The less not bright, nor Heav'n such journies run, Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves The benefit: consider first, that Great Or Bright inferrs not Excellence: the Earth Though, in comparison of Heav'n, so small, Nor glistering, may of solid good containe More plenty then the Sun that barren shines Whose vertue on it self workes no effect, But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd His beams, unactive else, thir vigour find. Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries Officious, but to thee Earths habitant. And for the Heav'ns wide Circuit, let it speak The Makers high magnificence, who built So spacious, and his Line stretcht out so farr; That Man may know he dwells not in his own; An Edifice too large for him to fill, Lodg'd in a small partition, and the rest Ordain'd for uses to his Lord best known. The swiftness of those Circles attribute Though numberless, to his Omnipotence, That to corporeal substances could adde Speed almost Spiritual; mee thou thinkst not slow, Who since the Morning hour set out from Heav'n Where God resides, and ere mid-day arriv'd In Eden, distance inexpressible By Numbers that have name.   But this I urge, Admitting Motion in the Heav'ns, to shew Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov'd; Not that I so affirm, though so it seem To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth. God to remove his wayes from human sense, Plac'd Heav'n from Earth so farr, that earthly sight, If it presume, might erre in things too high, And no advantage gaine.   What if the Sun Be Center to the World, and other Starrs By his attractive vertue and thir own Incited, dance about him various rounds? Thir wandring course now high, now low, then hid, Progressive, retrograde, or standing still, In six thou seest, and what if sev'nth to these The Planet Earth, so stedfast though she seem, Insensibly three different Motions move? Which else to several Sphears thou must ascribe, Mov'd contrarie with thwart obliquities, Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb suppos'd, Invisible else above all Starrs, the Wheele Of Day and Night; which needs not thy beleefe, If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day Travelling East, and with her part averse From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part Still luminous by his ray.   What if that light Sent from her through the wide transpicuous aire, To the terrestrial Moon be as a Starr Enlightning her by Day, as she by Night This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there, Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou seest As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce Fruits in her soft'nd Soile, for some to eate Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps With thir attendant Moons thou wilt descrie Communicating Male and Femal Light, Which two great Sexes animate the World, Stor'd in each Orb perhaps with some that live. For such vast room in Nature unpossest By living Soule, desert and desolate, Onely to shine, yet scarce to contribute Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyd so farr Down to this habitable, which returnes Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. But whether thus these things, or whether not, Whether the Sun predominant in Heav'n Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun Hee from the East his flaming rode begin, Or Shee from West her silent course advance With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev'n, And beares thee soft with the smooth Air along, Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid, Leave them to God above, him serve and feare; Of other Creatures, as him pleases best, Wherever plac't, let him dispose: joy thou In what he gives to thee, this Paradise And thy faire Eve; Heav'n is for thee too high To know what passes there; be lowlie wise:. Think onely what concernes thee and thy being; Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there Live, in what state, condition or degree, Contented that thus farr hath been reveal'd Not of Earth onely but of highest Heav'n. To whom thus Adam cleerd of doubt, repli'd. How fully hast thou satisfi'd mee, pure Intelligence of Heav'n, Angel serene, And freed from intricacies, taught to live, The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which God hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares, And not molest us, unless we our selves Seek them with wandring thoughts, and notions vain. But apt the Mind or Fancie is to roave Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end; Till warn'd, or by experience taught, she learne, That not to know at large of things remote From use, obscure and suttle, but to know That which before us lies in daily life, Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume, Or emptiness, or fond impertinence, And renders us in things that most concerne Unpractis'd, unprepar'd, and still to seek. Therefore from this high pitch let us descend A lower flight, and speak of things at hand Useful, whence haply mention may arise Of somthing not unseasonable to ask By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deign'd. Thee I have heard relating what was don Ere my remembrance: now hear mee relate My Storie, which perhaps thou hast not heard; And Day is yet not spent; till then thou seest How suttly to detaine thee I devise, Inviting thee to hear while I relate, Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply: For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heav'n, And sweeter thy discourse is to my eare Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst And hunger both, from labour, at the houre Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill, Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine Imbu'd, bring to thir sweetness no satietie. To whom thus Raphael answer'd heav'nly meek. Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men, Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee Abundantly his gifts hath also pour'd Inward and outward both, his image faire: Speaking or mute all comliness and grace Attends thee, and each word, each motion formes, Nor less think wee in Heav'n of thee on Earth Then of our fellow servant, and inquire Gladly into the wayes of God with Man: For God we see hath honour'd thee, and set On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on; For I that Day was absent, as befell, Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, Farr on excursion toward the Gates of Hell; Squar'd in full Legion (such command we had) To see that none thence issu'd forth a spie, Or enemie, while God was in his work, Least hee incenst at such eruption bold, Destruction with Creation might have mixt. Not that they durst without his leave attempt, But us he sends upon his high behests For state, as Sovran King, and to enure Our prompt obedience.   Fast we found, fast shut The dismal Gates, and barricado'd strong; But long ere our approaching heard within Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song, Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. Glad we return'd up to the coasts of Light Ere Sabbath Eev'ning: so we had in charge. But thy relation now; for I attend, Pleas'd with thy words no less then thou with mine. So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire. For Man to tell how human Life began Is hard; for who himself beginning knew? Desire with thee still longer to converse Induc'd me.   As new wak't from soundest sleep Soft on the flourie herb I found me laid In Balmie Sweat, which with his Beames the Sun Soon dri'd, and on the reaking moisture fed. Strait toward Heav'n my wondring Eyes I turnd, And gaz'd a while the ample Skie, till rais'd By quick instinctive motion up I sprung, As thitherward endevoring, and upright Stood on my feet; about me round I saw Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plaines, And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these, Creatures that livd, and movd, and walk'd, or flew, Birds on the branches warbling; all things smil'd, With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow'd. My self I then perus'd, and Limb by Limb Survey'd, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran With supple joints, and lively vigour led: But who I was, or where, or from what cause, Knew not; to speak I tri'd, and forthwith spake My Tongue obey'd and readily could name What e're I saw.   Thou Sun, said I, faire Light, And thou enlight'nd Earth, so fresh and gay, Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plaines, And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell, Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here? Not of my self; by some great Maker then, In goodness and in power praeeminent; Tell me, how may I know him, how adore, From whom I have that thus I move and live, And feel that I am happier then I know. While thus I call'd, and stray'd I knew not whither, From where I first drew Aire, and first beheld This happie Light, when answer none return'd, On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep First found me, and with soft oppression seis'd My droused sense, untroubl'd, though I thought I then was passing to my former state Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve: When suddenly stood at my Head a dream, Whose inward apparition gently mov'd My fancy to believe I yet had being, And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine, And said, thy Mansion wants thee, Adam, rise, First Man, of Men innumerable ordain'd First Father, call'd by thee I come thy Guide To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepar'd. So saying, by the hand he took me rais'd, And over Fields and Waters, as in Aire Smooth sliding without step, last led me up A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plaine, A Circuit wide, enclos'd, with goodliest Trees Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemd.   Each Tree Load'n with fairest Fruit that hung to the Eye Tempting, stirr'd in me sudden appetite To pluck and eate; whereat I wak'd, and found Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream Had lively shadowd: Here had new begun My wandring, had not hee who was my Guide Up hither, from among the Trees appeer'd Presence Divine.   Rejoycing, but with aw In adoration at his feet I fell Submiss: he rear'd me, and Whom thou soughtst I am, Said mildely, Author of all this thou seest Above, or round about thee or beneath. This Paradise I give thee, count it thine To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eate: Of every Tree that in the Garden growes Eate freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth: But of the Tree whose operation brings Knowledg of good and ill, which I have set The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life Remember what I warne thee, shun to taste, And shun the bitter consequence: for know, The day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command Transgrest, inevitably thou shalt dye; From that day mortal, and this happie State Shalt loose, expell'd from hence into a World Of woe and sorrow.   Sternly he pronounc'd The rigid interdiction, which resounds Yet dreadful in mine eare, though in my choice Not to incur; but soon his cleer aspect Return'd and gracious purpose thus renew'd. Not onely these fair bounds, but all the Earth To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords Possess it, and all things that therein live, Or live in Sea, or Aire, Beast, Fish, and Fowle. In signe whereof each Bird and Beast behold After thir kindes; I bring them to receave From thee thir Names, and pay thee fealtie With low subjection; understand the same Of Fish within thir watry residence, Not hither summond, since they cannot change Thir Element to draw the thinner Aire. As thus he spake, each Bird and Beast behold Approaching two and two, These cowring low With blandishment, each Bird stoop'd on his wing. I nam'd them, as they pass'd, and understood Thir Nature, with such knowledg God endu'd My sudden apprehension: but in these I found not what me thought I wanted still; And to the Heav'nly vision thus presum'd. O by what Name, for thou above all these, Above mankinde, or aught then mankinde higher, Surpassest farr my naming, how may I Adore thee, Author of this Universe, And all this good to man, for whose well being So amply, and with hands so liberal Thou hast provided all things: but with mee I see not who partakes.   In solitude What happiness, who can enjoy alone, Or all enjoying, what contentment find? Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright, As with a smile more bright'nd, thus repli'd. What call'st thou solitude, is not the Earth With various living creatures, and the Aire Replenisht, and all these at thy command To come and play before thee, know'st thou not Thir language and thir wayes, they also know, And reason not contemptibly; with these Find pastime, and beare rule; thy Realm is large. So spake the Universal Lord, and seem'd So ordering.   I with leave of speech implor'd, And humble deprecation thus repli'd. Let not my words offend thee, Heav'nly Power, My Maker, be propitious while I speak. Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, And these inferiour farr beneath me set? Among unequals what societie Can sort, what harmonie or true delight? Which must be mutual, in proportion due Giv'n and receiv'd; but in disparitie The one intense, the other still remiss Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak Such as I seek, fit to participate All rational delight, wherein the brute Cannot be human consort; they rejoyce Each with thir kinde, Lion with Lioness; So fitly them in pairs thou hast combin'd; Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowle So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape; Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all. Whereto th' Almighty answer'd, not displeas'd.  A nice and suttle happiness I see Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitarie. What thinkst thou then of mee, and this my State, Seem I to thee sufficiently possest Of happiness, or not? who am alone From all Eternitie, for none I know Second to me or like, equal much less. How have I then with whom to hold converse Save with the Creatures which I made, and those To me inferiour, infinite descents Beneath what other Creatures are to thee? He ceas'd, I lowly answer'd.   To attaine The highth and depth of thy Eternal wayes All human thoughts come short, Supream of things; Thou in thy self art perfet, and in thee Is no deficience found; not so is Man, But in degree, the cause of his desire By conversation with his like to help, Or solace his defects.   No need that thou Shouldst propagat, already infinite; And through all numbers absolute, though One; But Man by number is to manifest His single imperfection, and beget Like of his like, his Image multipli'd, In unitie defective, which requires Collateral love, and deerest amitie. Thou in thy secresie although alone, Best with thy self accompanied, seek'st not Social communication, yet so pleas'd, Canst raise thy Creature to what highth thou wilt Of Union or Communion, deifi'd; I by conversing cannot these erect From prone, nor in thir wayes complacence find. Thus I embold'nd spake, and freedom us'd Permissive, and acceptance found, which gain'd This answer from the gratious voice Divine. Thus farr to try thee, Adam, I was pleas'd, And finde thee knowing not of Beasts alone, Which thou hast rightly nam'd, but of thy self, Expressing well the spirit within thee free, My Image, not imparted to the Brute, Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike, And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak'st, Knew it not good for Man to be alone, And no such companie as then thou saw'st Intended thee, for trial onely brought, To see how thou could'st judge of fit and meet: What next I bring shall please thee, be assur'd, Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self, Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire. Hee ended, or I heard no more, for now My earthly by his Heav'nly overpowerd, Which it had long stood under, streind to the highth In that celestial Colloquie sublime, As with an object that excels the sense, Dazl d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, call'd By Nature as in aide, and clos'd mine eyes. Mine eyes he clos'd, but op'n left the Cell Of Fancie my internal sight, by which Abstract as in a transe methought I saw, Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape Still glorious before whom awake I stood; Who stooping op'nd my left side, and took From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warme, And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound, But suddenly with flesh fill'd up and heal'd: The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands; Under his forming hands a Creature grew, Manlike, but different Sex, so lovly faire, That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now Mean, or in her summd up, in her containd And in her looks, which from that time infus'd Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before, And into all things from her Aire inspir'd The spirit of love and amorous delight. Shee disappeerd, and left me dark, I wak'd To find her, or for ever to deplore Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure: When out of hope, behold her, not farr off, Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow To make her amiable: On she came, Led by her Heav'nly Maker, though unseen, And guided by his voice, nor uninformd Of nuptial Sanctitie and marriage Rites: Grace was in all her steps, Heav'n in her Eye, In every gesture dignitie and love. I overjoyd could not forbear aloud. This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfill'd Thy words, Creator bounteous and benigne, Giver of all things faire, but fairest this Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.   I now see Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man Extracted; for this cause he shall forgoe Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere; And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soule. She heard me thus, and though divinely brought, Yet Innocence and Virgin Modestie, Her vertue and the conscience of her worth, That would be woo'd, and not unsought be won, Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir'd, The more desirable, or to say all, Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought, Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turn'd; I follow'd her, she what was Honour knew, And with obsequious Majestie approv'd My pleaded reason.   To the Nuptial Bowre I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heav'n, And happie Constellations on that houre Shed thir selectest influence; the Earth Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill; Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires Whisper'd it to the Woods, and from thir wings Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub, Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp. Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought My Storie to the sum of earthly bliss Which I enjoy, and must confess to find In all things else delight indeed, but such As us'd or not, works in the mind no change, Nor vehement desire, these delicacies I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flours, Walks, and the melodie of Birds; but here Farr otherwise, transported I behold, Transported touch; here passion first I felt, Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else Superiour and unmov'd, here onely weake Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance. Or Nature faild in mee, and left some part Not proof enough such Object to sustain, Or from my side subducting, took perhaps More then enough; at least on her bestow'd Too much of Ornament, in outward shew Elaborate, of inward less exact. For well I understand in the prime end Of Nature her th' inferiour, in the mind And inward Faculties, which most excell, In outward also her resembling less His Image who made both, and less expressing The character of that Dominion giv'n O're other Creatures; yet when I approach Her loveliness, so absolute she seems And in her self compleat, so well to know Her own, that what she wills to do or say, Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best; All higher knowledge in her presence falls Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her Looses discount'nanc't, and like folly shewes; Authority and Reason on her waite, As one intended first, not after made Occasionally; and to consummate all, Greatness of mind and nobleness thir seat Build in her loveliest, and create an awe About her, as a guard Angelic plac't. To whom the Angel with contracted brow. Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part; Do thou but thine, and be not diffident Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh, By attributing overmuch to things Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st. For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so, An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love, Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self; Then value: Oft times nothing profits more Then self esteem, grounded on just and right Well manag'd; of that skill the more thou know'st, The more she will acknowledge thee her Head, And to realities yield all her shows: Made so adorn for thy delight the more, So awful, that with honour thou maist love Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise. But if the sense of touch whereby mankind Is propagated seem such dear delight Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf't To Cattel and each Beast; which would not be To them made common and divulg'd, if aught Therein enjoy'd were worthy to subdue The Soule of Man, or passion in him move. What higher in her societie thou findst Attractive, human, rational, love still; In loving thou dost well, in passion not, Wherein true Love consists not; love refines The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale By which to heav'nly Love thou maist ascend, Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found. To whom thus half abash't Adam repli'd. Neither her out-side formd so fair, nor aught In procreation common to all kindes (Though higher of the genial Bed by far, And with mysterious reverence I deem) So much delights me as those graceful acts, Those thousand decencies that daily flow From all her words and actions mixt with Love And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign'd Union of Mind, or in us both one Soule; Harmonie to behold in wedded pair More grateful then harmonious sound to the eare. Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild, Who meet with various objects, from the sense Variously representing; yet still free Approve the best, and follow what I approve. To love thou blam'st me not, for love thou saist Leads up to Heav'n, is both the way and guide; Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask; Love not the heav'nly Spirits, and how thir Love Express they, by looks onely, or do they mix Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? To whom the Angel with a smile that glow'd Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue, Answer'd.   Let it suffice thee that thou know'st Us happie, and without Love no happiness. Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'st (And pure thou wert created) we enjoy In eminence, and obstacle find none Of membrane, joynt, or limb, exclusive barrs: Easier then Air with Air; if Spirits embrace, Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure Desiring; nor restrain'd conveyance need As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul. But I can now no more; the parting Sun Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles Hesperean sets, my Signal to depart. Be strong, live happie, and love, but first of all Him whom to love is to obey, and keep His great command; take heed least Passion sway Thy judgement to do aught, which else free Will Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons The weal or woe in thee is plac't; beware. I in thy persevering shall rejoyce, And all the Blest: stand fast; to stand or fall Free in thine own Arbitrement it lies. Perfet within, no outward aid require; And all temptation to transgress repel. So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus Follow'd with benediction.   Since to part, Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger, Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore. Gentle to me and affable hath been Thy condescension, and shall be honour'd ever With grateful Memorie: thou to mankind Be good and friendly still, and oft return. So parted they, the Angel up to Heav'n From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bowre.

"
"

MEanwhile the hainous and despightfull act Of Satan done in Paradise, and how Hee in the Serpent, had perverted Eve, Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit, Was known in Heav'n; for what can scape the Eye Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart Omniscient, who in all things wise and just, Hinder'd not Satan to attempt the minde Of Man, with strength entire, and free will arm'd, Complete to have discover'd and repulst Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend. For still they knew, and ought to have still remember'd The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit, Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, Incurr'd, what could they less, the penaltie, And manifold in sin, deserv'd to fall. Up into Heav'n from Paradise in haste Th' Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad For Man, for of his state by this they knew, Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln Entrance unseen. Soon as th' unwelcome news From Earth arriv'd at Heaven Gate, displeas'd All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare That time Celestial visages, yet mixt With pitie, violated not thir bliss. About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes Th' ethereal People ran, to hear and know How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream Accountable made haste to make appear With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance, And easily approv'd; when the most High Eternal Father from his secret Cloud, Amidst in Thunder utter'd thus his voice. Assembl'd Angels, and ye Powers return'd From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid, Nor troubl'd at these tidings from the Earth, Which your sincerest care could not prevent, Foretold so lately what would come to pass, When first this Tempter cross'd the Gulf from Hell. I told ye then he should prevail and speed On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc't And flatter'd out of all, believing lies Against his Maker; no Decree of mine Concurring to necessitate his Fall, Or touch with lightest moment of impulse His free Will, to her own inclining left In eevn scale. But fall'n he is, and now What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass On his transgression, Death denounc't that day, Which he presumes already vain and void, Because not yet inflicted, as he fear'd, By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find Forbearance no acquittance ere day end. Justice shall not return as bountie scorn'd. But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr'd All Judgement, whether in Heav'n, or Earth, or Hell. Easie it might be seen that I intend Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design'd Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie, And destin'd Man himself to judge Man fall'n. So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son Blaz'd forth unclouded Deitie; he full Resplendent all his Father manifest Express'd, and thus divinely answer'd milde. Father Eternal, thine is to decree, Mine both in Heav'n and Earth to do thy will Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov'd Mayst ever rest well pleas'd. I go to judge On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst, Whoever judg'd, the worst on mee must light, When time shall be, for so I undertook Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom On me deriv'd, yet I shall temper so Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none Are to behold the Judgment, but the judg'd, Those two; the third best absent is condemn'd, Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law Conviction to the Serpent none belongs. Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers, Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay. Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing'd. Now was the Sun in Western cadence low From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour To fan the Earth now wak'd, and usher in The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes Brought to thir Ears, while day declin'd, they heard, And from his presence hid themselves among The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God Approaching, thus to Adam call'd aloud. Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet My coming seen far off? I miss thee here, Not pleas'd, thus entertaind with solitude, Where obvious dutie erewhile appear'd unsaught: Or come I less conspicuous, or what change Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth. He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though first To offend, discount'nanc't both, and discompos'd; Love was not in thir looks, either to God Or to each other, but apparent guilt, And shame, and perturbation, and despaire, Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile. Whence Adam faultring long, thus answer'd brief. I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice Affraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom The gracious judge without revile repli'd. My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear'd, But still rejoyc't, how is it now become So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat? To whom thus Adam sore beset repli'd. O Heav'n! in evil strait this day I stand Before my judge, either to undergoe My self the total Crime, or to accuse My other self, the partner of my life; Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines, I should conceal, and not expose to blame By my complaint; but strict necessitie Subdues me, and calamitous constraint Least on my head both sin and punishment, However insupportable, be all Devolv'd; though should I hold my peace, yet thou Wouldst easily detect what I conceale. This Woman whom thou mad'st to be my help, And gav'st me as thy perfet gift, so good, So fit, so acceptable, so Divine, That from her hand I could suspect no ill, And what she did, whatever in it self, Her doing seem'd to justifie the deed; Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate. To whom the sovran Presence thus repli'd. Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide, Superior, or but equal, that to her Thou did'st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place Wherein God set thee above her made of thee, And for thee, whose perfection farr excell'd Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd Shee was indeed, and lovely to attract Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts Were such as under Government well seem'd, Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part And person, had'st thou known thy self aright. So having said, he thus to Eve in few: Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done? To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelm'd, Confessing soon, yet not before her judge Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli'd. The Serpent me beguil'd and I did eate. Which when the Lord God heard, without delay To Judgement he proceeded on th' accus'd Serpent though brute, unable to transferre The Guilt on him who made him instrument Of mischief, and polluted from the end Of his Creation; justly then accurst, As vitiated in Nature: more to know Concern'd not Man (since he no further knew) Nor alter'd his offence; yet God at last To Satan first in sin his doom apply'd, Though in mysterious terms, judg'd as then best: And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall. Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field; Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe, And dust shalt eat all the dayes of thy Life. Between Thee and the Woman I will put Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed; Her Seed shall bruse thy head, thou bruise his heel. So spake this Oracle, then verifi'd When Jesus son of Mary second Eve, Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav'n, Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht In open shew, and with ascention bright Captivity led captive through the Aire, The Realm it self of Satan long usurpt, Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; Eeven hee who now foretold his fatal bruise, And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn'd. Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule. On Adam last thus judgement he pronounc'd. Because thou hast heark'nd to the voice of thy Wife, And eaten of the Tree concerning which I charg'd thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof, Curs'd is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life; Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth Unbid, and thou shalt eate th' Herb of th' Field, In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread, Till thou return unto the ground, for thou Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth, For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne. So judg'd he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent, And th' instant stroke of Death denounc't that day Remov'd farr off; then pittying how they stood Before him naked to the aire, that now Must suffer change, disdain'd not to begin Thenceforth the form of servant to assume, As when he wash'd his servants feet so now As Father of his Familie he clad Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain, Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid; And thought not much to cloath his Enemies: Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness, Araying cover'd from his Fathers sight. To him with swift ascent he up returnd, Into his blissful bosom reassum'd In glory as of old, to him appeas'd All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. Meanwhile ere thus was sin'd and judg'd on Earth, Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death, In counterview within the Gates, that now Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame Farr into Chaos, since the Fiend pass'd through, Sin opening, who thus now to Death began. O Son, why sit we here each other viewing Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides For us his ofspring deare; It cannot be But that success attends him; if mishap, Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n By his Avenger, since no place like this Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, Wings growing, and Dominion giv'n me large Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on, Or sympathie, or som connatural force Powerful at greatest distance to unite With secret amity things of like kinde By secretest conveyance. Thou my Shade Inseparable must with mee along: For Death from Sin no power can separate. But least the difficultie of passing back Stay his return perhaps over this Gulfe Impassable, Impervious, let us try Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine Not unagreeable, to found a path Over this Maine from Hell to that new World Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument Of merit high to all th' infernal Host, Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse, Or transmigration, as thir lot shall lead. Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn By this new felt attraction and instinct. Whom thus the meager Shadow answerd soon. Goe whither Fate and inclination strong Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste The savour of Death from all things there that live: Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. So saying, with delight he snuff'd the smell Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote, Against the day of Battel, to a Field, Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur'd With sent of living Carcasses design'd For death, the following day, in bloodie fight. So sented the grim Feature, and upturn'd His Nostril wide into the murkie Air, Sagacious of his Quarry from so farr. Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste Wide Anarchie of Chaos damp and dark Flew divers, and with Power (thir Power was great) Hovering upon the Waters; what they met Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea Tost up and down, together crowded drove From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell. As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive Mountains of Ice, that stop th' imagin'd way Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soyle Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry, As with a Trident smote, and fix't as firm As Delos floating once; the rest his look Bound with Gorgonian rigor not to move, And with Asphaltic slime; broad as the Gate, Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather'd beach They fasten'd, and the Mole immense wraught on Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall Immovable of this now fenceless world Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell. So, if great things to small may be compar'd, Xerxes, the Libertie of Greece to yoke, From Susa his Memnonian Palace high Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joyn'd, And scourg'd with many a stroak th' indignant waves. Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock Over the vext Abyss, following the track Of Satan, to the self same place where hee First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe From out of Chaos to the out side bare Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made And durable; and now in little space The confines met of Empyrean Heav'n And of this World, and on the left hand Hell With long reach interpos'd; three sev'ral wayes In sight, to each of these three places led. And now thir way to Earth they had descri'd, To Paradise first tending, when behold Satan in likeness of an Angel bright Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion stearing His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries rose: Disguis'd he came, but those his Children dear Thir Parent soon discern'd, though in disguise. Hee after Eve seduc't, unminded slunk Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought Vain covertures; but when he saw descend The Son of God to judge them terrifi'd Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth Might suddenly inflict; that past, return'd By Night, and listening where the hapless Paire Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint, Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood Not instant, but of future time. With joy And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return'd, And at the brink of Chaos, neer the foot Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear. Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas'd. Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke. O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds, Thy Trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own, Thou art thir Author and prime Architect: For I no sooner in my Heart divin'd, My Heart, which by a secret harmonie Still moves with thine, join'd in connexion sweet, That thou on Earth hadst prosper'd, which thy looks Now also evidence, but straight I felt Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt That I must after thee with this thy Son; Such fatal consequence unites us three: Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds, Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure Detain from following thy illustrious track. Thou hast atchiev'd our libertie, confin'd Within Hell Gates till, now, thou us impow'rd To fortifie thus farr, and overlay With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss. Thine now is all this World, thy vertue hath won What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain'd With odds what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng'd Our foile in Heav'n; here thou shalt Monarch reign, There didst not; there let him still Victor sway, As Battel hath adjudg'd, from this new World Retiring, by his own doom alienated, And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide Of all things parted by th' Empyreal bounds, His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World, Or trie thee now more dang'rous to his Throne. Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad. Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both, High proof ye now have giv'n to be the Race Of Satan (for I glorie in the name, Antagonist of Heav'ns Almightie King) Amply have merited of me, of all Th' infernal Empire, that so neer Heav'ns dore Triumphal with triumphal act have met, Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent Of easie thorough-fare. Therefore while I Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease To my associate Powers, them to acquaint With these successes, and with them rejoyce, You two this way, among these numerous Orbs All yours, right down to Paradise descend; There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth Dominion exercise and in the Aire, Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar'd, Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. My Substitutes I send ye, and Create Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now My hold of this new Kingdom all depends, Through Sin to Death expos'd by my exploit. If your joynt power prevailes, th' affaires of Hell No detriment need feare, goe and be strong. So saying he dismiss'd them, they with speed Thir course through thickest Constellations held Spreading thir bane; the blasted Starrs lookt wan, And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips Then sufferd. Th' other way Satan went down The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side Disparted Chaos over built exclaimd, And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild, That scorn'd his indignation: through the Gate, Wide open and unguarded, Satan pass'd, And all about found desolate; for those Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge, Flown to the upper World; the rest were all Farr to the inland retir'd, about the walls Of Pandaemonium, Citie and proud seate Of Lucifer, so by allusion calld, Of that bright Starr to Satan paragond. There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand In Council sate, sollicitous what chance Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee Departing gave command, and they observ'd. As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe By Astracan over the Snowie Plaines Retires, or Bactrian Sophi from the hornes Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond The Realm of Aladule, in his retreate To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late Heav'n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell Many a dark League, reduc't in careful Watch Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting Each hour their great adventurer from the search Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt, In shew Plebeian Angel militant Of lowest order, past; and from the dore Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible Ascended his high Throne, which under state Of richest texture spred, at th' upper end Was plac't in regal lustre. Down a while He sate, and round about him saw unseen: At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head And shape Starr bright appeer'd, or brighter, clad With what permissive glory since his fall Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz'd At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng Bent thir aspect, and whom they wish'd beheld, Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th' acclaime: Forth rush'd in haste the great consulting Peers, Rais'd from thir Dark Divan, and with like joy Congratulant approach'd him, who with hand Silence, and with these words attention won. Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers, For in possession such, not onely of right, I call ye and declare ye now, returnd Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth Triumphant out of this infernal Pit Abominable, accurst, the house of woe, And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess, As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven Little inferiour, by my adventure hard With peril great atchiev'd. Long were to tell What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine Voyag'd th' unreal, vast, unbounded deep Of horrible confusion, over which By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav'd To expedite your glorious march; but I Toild out my uncouth passage, forc't to ride Th' untractable Abysse, plung'd in the womb Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wilde, That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos'd My journey strange, with clamorous uproare Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found The new created World, which fame in Heav'n Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful Of absolute perfection, therein Man Plac't in a Paradise, by our exile Made happie; Him by fraud I have seduc'd From his Creator, and the more to increase Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv'n up Both his beloved Man and all his World, To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, Without our hazard, labour, or allarme, To range in, and to dwell, and over Man To rule, as over all he should have rul'd. True is, mee also he hath judg'd, or rather Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape Man I deceav'd: that which to mee belongs, Is enmity, which he will put between Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel; His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head: A World who would not purchase with a bruise, Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th' account Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods, But up and enter now into full bliss. So having said, a while he stood, expecting Thir universal shout and high applause To fill his eare, when contrary he hears On all sides, from innumerable tongues A dismal universal hiss, the sound Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long Had leasure, wondring at himself now more; His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare, His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining Each other, till supplanted down he fell A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone, Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power Now rul'd him, punisht in the shape he sin'd, According to his doom: he would have spoke, But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue To forked tongue, for now were all transform'd Alike, to Serpents all as accessories To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now With complicated monsters head and taile, Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire, Cerastes hornd, Hydrus, and Ellops drear, And Dipsas (not so thick swarm'd once the Soil Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle Ophiusa) but still greatest hee the midst, Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime, Huge Python, and his Power no less he seem'd Above the rest still to retain; they all Him follow'd issuing forth to th' open Field, Where all yet left of that revolted Rout Heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array, Sublime with expectation when to see ln Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief; They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell, And horrid sympathie; for what they saw, They felt themselvs now changing; down thir arms, Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast, And the dire hiss renew'd, and the dire form Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment, As in thir crime. Thus was th' applause they meant, Turnd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame Cast on themselves from thir own mouths. There stood A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change, His will who reigns above, to aggravate Thir penance, laden with Fruit like that Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve Us'd by the Tempter: on that prospect strange Thir earnest eyes they fix'd, imagining For one forbidden Tree a multitude Now ris'n, to work them furder woe or shame; Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce, Though to delude them sent, could not abstain, But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks That curld Megaera: greedily they pluck'd The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew Neer that bituminous Lake where Sodom flam'd; This more delusive, not the touch, but taste Deceav'd; they fondly thinking to allay Thir appetite with gust, instead of Fruit Chewd bitter Ashes, which th' offended taste With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd, Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft, With hatefullest disrelish writh'd thir jaws With soot and cinders fill'd; so oft they fell Into the same illusion, not as Man Whom they triumph'd once lapst. Thus were they plagu'd And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss, Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum'd, Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo This annual humbling certain number'd days, To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc't. However some tradition they dispers'd Among the Heathen of thir purchase got, And Fabl'd how the Serpent, whom they calld Ophion with Eurynome, the wide- Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driv'n And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born. Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair Too soon arriv'd, Sin there in power before, Once actual, now in body, and to dwell Habitual habitant; behind her Death Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began. Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death, What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd With travail difficult, not better farr Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch, Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy self half starv'd? Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon. To mee, who with eternal Famin pine, Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven, There best, where most with ravin I may meet; Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps. To whom th' incestuous Mother thus repli'd. Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, and Flours Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle, No homely morsels, and whatever thing The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd, Till I in Man residing through the Race, His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect, And season him thy last and sweetest prey. This said, they both betook them several wayes, Both to destroy, or unimmortal make All kinds, and for destruction to mature Sooner or later; which th' Almightie seeing, From his transcendent Seat the Saints among, To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice. See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance To waste and havoc yonder World, which I So fair and good created, and had still Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man Let in these wastful Furies, who impute Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell And his Adherents, that with so much ease I suffer them to enter and possess A place so heav'nly, and conniving-seem To gratifie my scornful Enemies, That laugh, as if transported with some fit Of Passion, I to them had quitted all, At random yielded up to their misrule; And know not that I call'd and drew them thither My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed On what was pure, till cramm'd and gorg'd, nigh burst With suckt and glutted offal, at one sling Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son, Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last Through Chaos hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes. Then Heav'n and Earth renewd shall be made pure To sanctitie that shall receive no staine: Till then the Curse pronounc't on both precedes. He ended, and the heav'nly Audience loud Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas, Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways, Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works; Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son, Destin'd restorer of Mankind, by whom New Heav'n and Earth shall to the Ages rise, Or down from Heav'n descend. Such was thir song, While the Creator calling forth by name His mightie Angels gave them several charge, As sorted best with present things. The Sun Had first his precept so to move, so shine, As might affect the Earth with cold and heat Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc Moone Her office they prescrib'd, to th' other five Thir planetarie motions and aspects In Sextile, Square, and Trine, and Opposite, Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt Thir influence malignant when to showre, Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling, Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set Thir corners, when with bluster to confound Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle With terror through the dark Aereal Hall. Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more From the Suns Axle; they with labour push'd Oblique the Centric Globe: Som say the Sun Was bid turn Reines from th' Equinoctial Rode Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seav'n Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amaine By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales, As deep as Capricorne, to bring in change Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring Perpetual smil'd on Earth with vernant Flours, Equal in Days and Nights, except to those Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun To recompence his distance, in thir sight Had rounded still th' Horizon, and not known Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow From cold Estotiland, and South as farr Beneath Magellan. At that tasted Fruit The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turn'd His course intended; else how had the World Inhabited, though sinless, more then now, Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate? These changes in the Heav'ns, though slow, produc'd Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast, Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot, Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shoar Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw, Boreas and Caecias and Argestes loud And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn; With adverse blast upturns them from the South Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Windes Eurus and Zephir with thir lateral noise, Sirocco, and Libecchio, Thus began Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first Daughter of Sin, among th' irrational, Death introduc'd through fierce antipathie: Beast now with Beast gan war, and Fowle with Fowle, And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving, Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe Of Man, but fled him, or with count'nance grim Glar'd on him passing: these were from without The growing miseries, which Adam saw Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within, And in a troubl'd Sea of passion tost, Thus to disburd'n sought with sad complaint. O miserable of happie! is this the end Of this new glorious World, and mee so late The Glory of that Glory, who now becom Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face Of God, whom to behold was then my highth Of happiness: yet well, if here would end The miserie, I deserv'd it, and would beare My own deservings; but this will not serve; All that I eat or drink, or shall beget, Is propagated curse. O voice once heard Delightfully, Encrease and multiply, Now death to heare! for what can I encrease Or multiplie, but curses on my head? Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling The evil on him brought by me, will curse My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure, For this we may thank Adam; but his thanks Shall be the execration; so besides Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound, On mee as on thir natural center light Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes! Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee From darkness to promote me, or here place In this delicious Garden? as my Will Concurd not to my being, it were but right And equal to reduce me to my dust, Desirous to resigne, and render back All I receav'd, unable to performe Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold The good I sought not. To the loss of that, Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added The sense of endless woes? inexplicable Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late, I thus contest; then should have been refusd Those terms whatever, when they were propos'd: Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good, Then cavil the conditions? and though God Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son Prove disobedient, and reprov'd, retort, Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not: Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee That proud excuse? yet him not thy election, But Natural necessity begot. God made thee of choice his own, and of his own To serve him, thy reward was of his grace, Thy punishment then justly is at his Will. Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair, That dust I am, and shall to dust returne: O welcom hour whenever! why delayes His hand to execute what his Decree Fixd on this day? why do I overlive, Why am I mockt with death, and length'nd out To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth Insensible, how glad would lay me down As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse To mee and to my ofspring would torment me With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt Pursues me still, least all I cannot die, Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man Which God inspir'd, cannot together perish With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave, Or in some other dismal place who knows But I shall die a living Death? O thought Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath Of Life that sinn'd; what dies but what had life And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither. All of me then shall die: let this appease The doubt, since humane reach no further knows. For though the Lord of all be infinite, Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so, But mortal doom'd. How can he exercise Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end? Can he make deathless Death? that were to make Strange contradiction, which to God himself Impossible is held, as Argument Of weakness, not of Power. Will he, draw out, For angers sake, finite to infinite In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour Satisfi'd never; that were to extend His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law, By which all Causes else according still To the reception of thir matter act, Not to th' extent of thir own Spheare. But say That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos'd, Bereaving sense, but endless miserie From this day onward, which 1 feel begun Both in me, and without me, and so last To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution On my defensless head; both Death and I Am found Eternal, and incorporate both, Nor I on my part single, in mee all Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able To waste it all my self, and leave ye none! So disinherited how would ye bless Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn'd, If guiltless? But from me what can proceed, But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav'd, Not to do onely, but to will the same With me? how can they then acquitted stand In sight of God? Him after all Disputes Forc't I absolve: all my evasions vain, And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still But to my own conviction: first and last On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; So might the wrauth. Fond wish! couldst thou support That burden heavier then the Earth to bear Then all the World much heavier, though divided With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir'st And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable Beyond all past example and future, To Satan only like both crime and doom. O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears And horrors hast thou driv'n me; out of which I find no way, from deep to deeper plung'd! Thus Adam to himself lamented loud Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell, Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom, Which to his evil Conscience represented All things with double terror: On the Ground Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft Curs'd his Creation, Death as oft accus'd Of tardie execution, since denounc't The day of his offence. Why comes not Death, Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word, Justice Divine not hast'n to be just? But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries. O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs, With other echo late I taught your Shades To answer, and resound farr other Song. Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve bebeld, Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh, Soft words to his fierce passion she assay'd: But her with stern regard he thus repell'd. Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best Befits thee with him leagu'd, thy self as false And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee Henceforth; least that too heav'nly form, pretended To hellish falshood, snare them. But for thee I had persisted happie, had not thy pride And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe, Rejected my forewarning, and disdain'd Not to be trusted, longing to be seen Though by the Devil himself, him overweening To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting Fool'd and beguil'd, by him thou, I by thee, To trust thee from my side, imagin'd wise, Constant, mature, proof against all assaults, And understood not all was but a shew Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears, More to the part sinister from me drawn, Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie To my just number found. O why did God, Creator wise, that peopl'd highest Heav'n With Spirits Masculine, create at last This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect Of Nature, and not fill the World at once With Men as Angels without Feminine, Or find some other way to generate Mankind? this mischief had not then befall'n, And more that shall befall, innumerable Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares, And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either He never shall find out fit Mate, but such As some misfortune brings him, or mistake, Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain Through her perversness, but shall see her gaind By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld By Parents, or his happiest choice too late Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound To a fell Adversarie, his hate or shame: Which infinite calamitie shall cause To Humane life, and houshold peace confound. He added not, and from her turn'd, but Eve Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas'd not flowing, And tresses all disorderd, at his feet Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heav'n What love sincere, and reverence in my heart I beare thee, and unweeting have offended, Unhappilie deceav'd; thy suppliant I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, Thy counsel in this uttermost distress, My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee, Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps, Between us two let there be peace, both joyning, As joyn'd in injuries, one enmitie Against a Foe by doom express assign'd us, That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not Thy hatred for this miserie befall'n, On me alreadie lost, mee then thy self More miserable; both have sin'd, but thou Against God onely, I against God and thee, And to the place of judgment will return, There with my cries importune Heaven, that all The sentence from thy head remov'd may light On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe, Mee mee onely just object of his ire. She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight, Immoveable till peace obtain'd from fault Acknowledg'd and deplor'd, in Adam wraught Commiseration; soon his heart relented Towards her, his life so late and sole delight, Now at his feet submissive in distress, Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking, His counsel whom she had displeas'd, his aide; As one disarm'd, his anger all he lost, And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her soon. Unwarie, and too desirous, as before, So now of what thou knowst not, who desir'st The punishment all on thy self; alas, Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part, And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers Could alter high Decrees, I to that place Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, That on my head all might be visited, Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv'n, To me committed and by me expos'd. But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame Each other, blam'd enough elsewhere, but strive In offices of Love, how we may light'n Each others burden in our share of woe; Since this days Death denounc't, if ought I see, Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac't evill, A long days dying to augment our paine, And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) deriv'd. To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, repli'd. Adam, by sad experiment I know How little weight my words with thee can finde, Found so erroneous, thence by just event Found so unfortunate; nevertheless, Restor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart Living or dying, from thee I will not hide What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris'n, Tending to some relief of our extremes, Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, As in our evils, and of easier choice. If care of our descent perplex us most, Which must be born to certain woe, devourd By Death at last, and miserable it is To be to others cause of misery, Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring Into this cursed World a woful Race, That after wretched Life must be at last Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot. Childless thou art, Childless remaine: so Death Shall be deceav'd his glut, and with us two Be forc'd to satisfie his Rav'nous Maw. But if thou judge it hard and difficult, Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain From Loves due Rites, Nuptial imbraces sweet, And with desire to languish without hope, Before the present object languishing With like desire, which would be meserie And torment less then none of what we dread, Then both our selves and Seed at once to free From what we fear for both, let us make short, Let us seek Death, or he not found, supply With our own hands his Office on our selves; Why stand we longer shivering under feares, That shew no end but Death, and have the power, Of many ways to die the shortest choosing, Destruction with destruction to destroy. She ended heer, or vehement despaire Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts Had entertaind, as di'd her Cheeks with pale. But Adam with such counsel nothing sway'd, To better hopes his more attentive minde Labouring had rais'd, and thus to Eve repli'd. Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems To argue in thee somthing more sublime And excellent then what thy minde contemnes; But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes That excellence thought in thee, and implies, Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd. Or if thou covet death, as utmost end Of miserie, so thinking to evade The penaltie pronounc't, doubt not but God Hath wiselier arm'd his vengeful ire then so To be forestall'd; much more I fear least Death So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine We are by doom to pay; rather such acts Of contumacie will provoke the highest To make death in us live: Then let us seek Some safer resolution, which methinks I have in view, calling to minde with heed Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe Satan, who in the Serpent hath contriv'd Against us this deceit: to crush his head Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost By death brought on our selves, or childless days Resolv'd, as thou proposest; so our Foe Shall scape his punishment ordain'd, and wee Instead shall double ours upon our heads. No more be mention'd then of violence Against our selves, and wilful barrenness, That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely Rancor and pride, impatience and despite, Reluctance against God and his just yoke Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild And gracious temper he both heard and judg'd Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected Immediate dissolution, which we thought Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold, And bringing forth, soon recompenc't with joy, Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope Glanc'd on the ground, with labour I must earne My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse; My labour will sustain me; and least Cold Or Heat should injure us, his timely care Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands Cloath'd us unworthie, pitying while he judg'd; How much more, if we pray him, will his ear Be open, and his heart to pitie incline, And teach us further by what means to shun Th' inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow, Which now the Skie with various Face begins To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish Our Limbs benumm'd, ere this diurnal Starr Leave cold the Night, how we his gather'd beams Reflected, may with matter sere foment, Or by collision of two bodies grinde The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv'n down Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine, And sends a comfortable heat from farr, Which might supplie the Sun: such Fire to use, And what may else be remedie or cure To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace Beseeching him, so as we need not fear To pass commodiously this life, sustain'd By him with many comforts, till we end In dust, our final rest and native home. What better can we do, then to the place Repairing where he judg'd us, prostrate fall Before him reverent, and there confess Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Undoubtedly he will relent and turn From his displeasure; in whose look serene, When angry most he seem'd and most severe, What else but favor, grace, and mercie shon? So spake our Father penitent, nor Eve Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place Repairing where he judg'd them prostrate fell Before him reverent, and both confess'd Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg'd, with tears Watering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.

"
"

Hamelin Town's in Brunswick,    By famous Hanover city; The river Weser, deep and wide, Washes its wall on the southern side; A pleasanter spot you never spied;    But, when begins my ditty, Almost five hundred years ago, To see the townsfolk suffer so    From vermin, was a pity.       Rats! They fought the dogs, and killed the cats,    And bit the babies in the cradles, And eat the cheeses out of the vats,    And licked the soup from the cooks' own ladles, Split open the kegs of salted sprats, Made nests inside men's Sunday hats, And even spoiled the women's chats       By drowning their speaking       With shrieking and squeaking In fifty different sharps and flats. At last the people in a body    To the Town Hall came flocking: 'Tis clear, cried they, our Mayor's a noddy;    And as for our Corporation — shocking To think we buy gowns lined with ermine For dolts that can't or won't determine What's like to rid us of our vermin! Rouse up, Sirs! Give your brains a racking To find the remedy we're lacking, Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing!    At this the Mayor and Corporation    Quaked with a mighty consternation. An hour they sate in council,    At length the Mayor broke silence: For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell;    I wish I were a mile hence! It's easy to bid one rack one's brain — I'm sure my poor head aches again I've scratched it so, and all in vain. Oh for a trap, a trap, a trap! Just as he said this, what should hap At the chamber door but a gentle tap? Bless us, cried the Mayor, what's that? (With the Corporation as he sate, Looking little though wondrous fat); Only a scraping of shoes on the mat? Anything like the sound of a rat Makes my heart go pit-a-pat! Come in! — the Mayor cried, looking bigger: And in did come the strangest figure! His queer long coat from heel to head Was half of yellow and half of red; And he himself was tall and thin, With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin, And light loose hair, yet swarthy skin, No tuft on cheek nor beard on chin, But lips where smiles went out and in — There was no guessing his kith and kin! And nobody could enough admire The tall man and his quaint attire: Quoth one: It's as my great-grandsire, Starting up at the Trump of Doom's tone, Had walked this way from his painted tombstone! He advanced to the council-table: And, Please your honours, said he, I'm able, By means of a secret charm, to draw All creatures living beneath the sun, That creep, or swim, or fly, or run, After me so as you never saw! And I chiefly use my charm On creatures that do people harm, The mole, and toad, and newt, and viper; And people call me the Pied Piper. (And here they noticed round his neck A scarf of red and yellow stripe, To match with his coat of the self-same cheque; And at the scarf's end hung a pipe; And his fingers, they noticed, were ever straying As if impatient to be playing Upon this pipe, as low it dangled Over his vesture so old-fangled.) Yet, said he, poor piper as I am, In Tartary I freed the Cham, Last June, from his huge swarms of gnats; I eased in Asia the Nizam Of a monstrous brood of vampyre-bats: And, as for what your brain bewilders, If I can rid your town of rats Will you give me a thousand guilders? One? fifty thousand! — was the exclamation Of the astonished Mayor and Corporation. Into the street the Piper stept,    Smiling first a little smile, As if he knew what magic slept    In his quiet pipe the while; Then, like a musical adept, To blow the pipe his lips he wrinkled, And green and blue his sharp eyes twinkled, Like a candle-flame where salt is sprinkled; And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered, You heard as if an army muttered; And the muttering grew to a grumbling; And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling; And out of the houses the rats came tumbling. Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats, Brown rats, black rats, grey rats, tawny rats, Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,    Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins, Cocking tails and pricking whiskers,    Families by tens and dozens, Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives — Followed the Piper for their lives. From street to street he piped advancing, And step for step they followed dancing, Until they came to the river Weser Wherein all plunged and perished  — Save one who, stout as Julius Caesar, Swam across and lived to carry (As he the manuscript he cherished) To Rat-land home his commentary, Which was, At the first shrill notes of the pipe, I heard a sound as of scraping tripe, And putting apples, wondrous ripe, Into a cider-press's gripe: And a moving away of pickle-tub-boards, And a leaving ajar of conserve-cupboards, And a drawing the corks of train-oil-flasks, And a breaking the hoops of butter-casks; And it seemed as if a voice (Sweeter than by harp or by psaltery Is breathed) called out, Oh rats, rejoice! The world is grown to one vast drysaltery! 'So munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon, 'Breakfast, supper, dinner, luncheon! And just as one bulky sugar-puncheon, Ready staved, like a great sun shone Glorious scarce an inch before me, Just as methought it said, Come, bore me!  — I found the Weser rolling o'er me. You should have heard the Hamelin people Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple; Go, cried the Mayor, and get long poles! Poke out the nests and block up the holes! Consult with carpenters and builders, And leave in our town not even a trace Of the rats! — when suddenly up the face Of the Piper perked in the market-place, With a, First, if you please, my thousand guilders! A thousand guilders! The Mayor looked blue; So did the Corporation too. For council dinners made rare havock With Claret, Moselle, Vin-de-Grave, Hock; And half the money would replenish Their cellar's biggest butt with Rhenish. To pay this sum to a wandering fellow With a gipsy coat of red and yellow! Beside, quoth the Mayor with a knowing wink, Our business was done at the river's brink; We saw with our eyes the vermin sink, And what's dead can't come to life, I think. So, friend, we're not the folks to shrink From the duty of giving you something for drink, And a matter of money to put in your poke; But, as for the guilders, what we spoke Of them, as you very well know, was in joke. Beside, our losses have made us thrifty; A thousand guilders! Come, take fifty! The Piper's face fell, and he cried, No trifling! I can't wait, beside! I've promised to visit by dinner time Bagdat, and accept the prime Of the Head Cook's pottage, all he's rich in, For having left, in the Caliph's kitchen, Of a nest of scorpions no survivor — With him I proved no bargain-driver, With you, don't think I'll bate a stiver! And folks who put me in a passion May find me pipe after another fashion. How? cried the Mayor, d'ye think I'll brook Being worse treated than a Cook? Insulted by a lazy ribald With idle pipe and vesture piebald? You threaten us, fellow? Do your worst, Blow your pipe there till you burst! Once more he stept into the street;    And to his lips again Laid his long pipe of smooth straight cane;    And ere he blew three notes (such sweet Soft notes as yet musician's cunning    Never gave th'enraptured air) There was a rustling, that seem'd like a bustling Of merry crowds justling at pitching and hustling, Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering, Little hands clapping, and little tongues chattering, And, like fowls in a farm-yard when barley is scattering, Out came the children running. All the little boys and girls, With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls, And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls, Tripping and skipping, ran merrily after The wonderful music with shouting and laughter. The Mayor was dumb, and the Council stood As if they were changed into blocks of wood, Unable to move a step, or cry To the children merrily skipping by — Could only follow with the eye That joyous crowd at the Piper's back. But how the Mayor was on the rack, And the wretched Council's bosoms beat, As the Piper turned from the High Street To where the Weser rolled its waters Right in the way of their sons and daughters! However he turned from South to West, And to Coppelburg Hill his steps addressed, And after him the children pressed; Great was the joy in every breast. He never can cross that mighty top! He's forced to let the piping drop, And we shall see our children stop! When, lo, as they reached the mountain's side, A wondrous portal opened wide, As if a cavern was suddenly hollowed; And the Piper advanced and the children follow'd, And when all were in to the very last, The door in the mountain side shut fast. Did I say, all? No! One was lame, And could not dance the whole of the way; And in after years, if you would blame His sadness, he was used to say, — It's dull in our town since my playmates left! I can't forget that I'm bereft Of all the pleasant sights they see, Which the Piper also promised me; For he led us, he said, to a joyous land, Joining the town and just at hand, Where waters gushed and fruit-trees grew, And flowers put forth a fairer hue, And every thing was strange and new; The sparrows were brighter than peacocks here, And their dogs outran our fallow deer, And honey-bees had lost their stings, And horses were born with eagles' wings: And just as I felt assured My lame foot would be speedily cured, The music stopped and I stood still, And found myself outside the Hill, Left alone against my will, To go now limping as before, And never hear of that country more! Alas, alas for Hamelin!    There came into many a burgher's pate    A text which says, that Heaven's Gate    Opes to the Rich at as easy a rate As the needle's eye takes a camel in! The Mayor sent East, West, North, and South, To offer the Piper, by word of mouth,    Wherever it was men's lot to find him, Silver and gold to his heart's content, If he'd only return the way he went,    And bring the children behind him. But when they saw 'twas a lost endeavour, And Piper and dancers were gone for ever, They made a decree that lawyers never    Should think their records dated duly If, after the day of the month and year, These words did not as well appear, ""And so long after what happened here    ""On the Twenty-second of July, ""Thirteen hundred and Seventy-six:"" And the better in memory to fix The place of the Children's last retreat, They called it, The Pied Piper's Street — Where any one playing on pipe or tabor Was sure for the future to lose his labour. Nor suffered they Hostelry or Tavern    To shock with mirth a street so solemn; But opposite the place of the cavern    They wrote the story on a column, And on the Great Church Window painted The same, to make the world acquainted How their children were stolen away; And there it stands to this very day. And I must not omit to say That in Transylvania there's a tribe Of alien people who ascribe The outlandish ways and dress On which their neighbours lay such stress To their fathers and mothers having risen Out of some subterraneous prison Into which they were trepanned Long time ago in a mighty band Out of Hamelin town in Brunswick land, But how or why, they don't understand. So, Willy, let you and me be wipers Of scores out with all men — especially pipers: And, whether they pipe us from rats or from mice, If we've promised them aught, let us keep our promise.

"
"

The time is come I must departe        from thee, ah, famous Citie:I never yet, to rue my smart,        did finde that thou hadst pitie,Wherefore small cause ther is, that I        should greeve from thee to go:But many Women foolyshly,        lyke me, and other moe.Doe such a fyxed fancy set,        on those which least desarve,That long it is ere wit we get,        away from them to swarve,But tyme with pittie oft wyl tel        to those that wil her try:Whether it best be more to mell,        or vtterly defye.And now hath time me put in mind,        of thy great cruelnes:That never once a help wold finde,        to ease me in distres.Thou never yet woldst credit geve        to boord me for a yeare:Nor with Apparell me releve        except thou payed weare.No, no, thou never didst me good,        nor ever wilt, I know:Yet am I in no angry moode,        but wyll, or ere I goe,In perfect love and charytie        my Testament here write:And leave to thee such Treasurye,        as I in it recyte.Now stand a side and geve me leave        to write my latest Wyll:And see that none you do deceave,        of that I leave them tyl.I whole in body, and in minde,        but very weake in Purse:Doo make, and write my Testament        for feare it wyll be wurse.And fyrst I wholy doo commend,        my Soule and Body eke:To God the Father and the Son,        so long as I can speake.And after speach: my Soule to hym,        and Body to the Grave:Tyll time that all shall rise agayne,        their Judgement for to have.And then I hope they both shal meete.        to dwell for aye in ioye:Whereas I trust to see my Friends        releast, from all annoy.Thus have you heard touching my soule,        and body what I meane:I trust you all wyll witnes beare,        I have a stedfast brayne.And now let mee dispose such things,        as I shal leave behinde:That those which shall receave the same,        may know my wylling minde.I firste of all to London leave        because I there was bred:Braue buildyngs rare, of Churches store,        and Pauls to the head.Betweene the same: fayre streats there bee,        and people goodly store:Because their keeping craveth cost,        I yet wil leave him more.First for their foode, I Butchers leave,        that every day shall kyll:By Thames you shal have Brewers store,        and Bakers at your wyll.And such as orders doo obserue,        and eat fish thrice a weeke:I leave two Streets, full fraught therwith,        they neede not farre to seeke.Watlyng Streete, and Canwyck streete,        I full of Wollen leave:And Linnen store in Friday streete,        if they mee not deceave.And those which are of callyng such,        that costlier they require:I Mercers leave, with silke so rich,        as any would desyre.In Cheape of them, they store shal finde        and likewise in that streete:I Goldsmithes leave, with Iuels such,        as are for Ladies meete.And Plate to furnysh Cubbards with,        full braue there shall you finde:With Purle of Siluer and of Golde,        to satisfye your minde.With Hoods, Bungraces, Hats or Caps,        such store are in that streete:As if on ton side you should misse        the tother serues you feete.For Nets of every kynd of sort,        I leave within the pawne:French Ruffes, high Purles, Gorgets and Sleeves        of any kind of Lawne.For Purse or Kniues, for Combe or Glasse,        or any needeful knackeI by the Stoks have left a Boy,        wil aske you what you lack.I Hose doo leave in Birchin Lane,        of any kynd of syse:For Women stitchte, for men both Trunks        and those of Gascoyne gise.Bootes, Shoes or Pantables good store,        Saint Martins hath for you:In Cornwall, there I leave you Beds,        and all that longs thereto.For Women shall you Taylors have,        by Bow, the chiefest dwel:In every Lane you some shall finde,        can doo indifferent well.And for the men, few Streetes or Lanes,        but Bodymakers bee:And such as make the sweeping Cloakes,        with Gardes beneth the Knee.Artyllery at Temple Bar,        and Dagges at Tower hyll:Swords and Bucklers of the best,        are nye the Fleete vntyll.Now when thy Folke are fed and clad        with such as I have namde:For daynty mouthes, and stomacks weake        some Iunckets must be framde.Wherfore I Poticaries leave,        with Banquets in their Shop:Phisicians also for the sicke,        Diseases for to stop.Some Roysters styll, must bide in thee,        and such as cut it out:That with the guiltlesse quarel wyl,        to let their blood about.For them I cunning Surgions leave,        some Playsters to apply.That Ruffians may not styll be hangde,        nor quiet persons dye.For Salt, Otemeale, Candles, Sope,        or what you els doo want:In many places, Shops are full,        I left you nothing scant.Yf they that keepe what I you leave,        aske Mony: when they sell it:At Mint, there is such store, it is        vnpossible to tell it.At Stiliarde store of Wines there bee,        your dulled mindes to glad:And handsome men, that must not wed        except they leave their trade.They oft shal seeke for proper Gyrles,        and some perhaps shall fynde:(That neede compels, or lucre lures        to satisfye their mind.)And neare the same, I houses leave,        for people to repayre:To bathe themselues, so to preuent        infection of the ayre.On Saturdayes I wish that those,        which all the weeke doo drug:Shall thyther trudge, to trim them vp        on Sondayes to looke smug.Yf any other thing be lackt        in thee, I wysh them looke:For there it is: I little brought        but nothyng from thee tooke.Now for the people in thee left,        I have done as I may:And that the poore, when I am gone,        have cause for me to pray.I wyll to prisons portions leave,        what though but very small:Yet that they may remember me,        occasion be it shall:And fyrst the Counter they shal have,        least they should go to wrack:Some Coggers, and some honest men,        that Sergantes draw a back.And such as Friends wyl not them bayle,        whose coyne is very thin:For them I leave a certayne hole,        and little ease within.The Newgate once a Monthe shal have        a sessions for his share:Least being heapt, Infection might        procure a further care.And at those sessions some shal skape,        with burning nere the Thumb:And afterward to beg their fees,        tyll they have got the some.And such whose deedes deserueth death,        and twelue have found the same:They shall be drawne vp Holborne hill,        to come to further shame:Well, yet to such I leave a Nag        shal soone their sorowes cease:For he shal either breake their necks        or gallop from the preace.The Fleete, not in their circuit is,        yet if I geve him nought:It might procure his curse, ere I        unto the ground be brought.Wherfore I leave some Papist olde        to vnder prop his roofe:And to the poore within the same,        a Boxe for their behoofe.What makes you standers by to smile.        and laugh so in your sleeve:I thinke it is, because that I        to Ludgate nothing geve.I am not now in case to lye,        here is no place of iest:I dyd reserve, that for my selfe,        yf I my health possest.And ever came in credit so        a debtor for to bee.When dayes of paiment did approch,        I thither ment to flee.To shroude my selfe amongst the rest,        that chuse to dye in debt:Rather then any Creditor,        should money from them get.Yet cause I feele my selfe so weake        that none mee credit dare:I heere reuoke: and doo it leave,        some Banckrupts to his share.To all the Bookebinders by Paulles        because I lyke their Arte:They e'ry weeke shal mony have,        when they from Bookes departe.Amongst them all, my Printer must,        have somwhat to his share:I wyll my Friends these Bookes to bye        of him, with other ware.For Maydens poore, I Widdoers ritch,        do leave, that oft shall dote:And by that meanes shal mary them,        to set the Girles aflote.And wealthy Widdowes wil I leave,        to help yong Gentylmen:Which when you have, in any case        be courteous to them then:And see their Plate and Iewells eake        may not be mard with rust.Nor let their Bags too long be full,        for feare that they doo burst.To e'ry Gate vnder the walles,        that compas thee about:I Fruit wives leave to entertayne        such as come in and out.To Smithfeelde I must something leave        my Parents there did dwell:So carelesse for to be of it,        none wolde accompt it well.Wherfore it thrice a weeke shall have,        of Horse and neat good store,And in his Spitle, blynd and lame,        to dwell for evermore.And Bedlem must not be forgot,        for that was oft my walke:I people there too many leave,        that out of tune doo talke.At Bridewel there shal Bedelles be,        and Matrones that shal styllSee Chalke wel chopt, and spinning plyde,        and turning of the Mill.For such as cannot quiet bee,        but striue for House or Land:At Th' innes of Court, I Lawyers leave        to take their cause in hand.And also leave I at ech Inne        of Court, or Chauncerye:Of Gentylmen, a youthfull roote,        full of Actiuytie:For whom I store of Bookes have left,        at each Bookebinders stall:And parte of all that London hath        to furnish them withall.And when they are with study cloyd:        to recreate theyr minde:Of Tennis Courts, of dauncing Scooles,        and fence they store shal finde.And every Sonday at the least,        I leave to make them sport.In diuers places Players, that        of wonders shall reporte.Now London have I (for thy sake)        within thee, and without:As coms into my memory,        dispearsed round aboutSuch needfull thinges, as they should have        heere left now unto thee:When I am gon, with consience,        let them dispearced bee.And though I nothing named have,        to bury mee withall:Consider that aboue the ground,        annoyance bee I shall.And let me have a shrowding Sheete        to couer mee from shame:And in obliuyon bury mee        and never more mee name.Ringings nor other Ceremonies,        vse you not for cost:Nor at my buriall, make no feast,        your mony were but lost.Reioyce in God that I am gon,        out of this vale so vile.And that of ech thing, left such store,        as may your wants exile.I make thee sole executor, because        I lou'de thee best.And thee I put in trust, to geve        the goodes unto the rest.Because thou shalt a helper neede,        In this so great a chardge,I wysh good Fortune, be thy guide, least        thou shouldst run at lardge.The happy dayes and quiet times,        they both her Seruants bee.Which well wyll serue to fetch and bring,        such things as neede to thee.Wherfore (good London) not refuse,        for helper her to take:Thus being weake and wery both        an end heere wyll I make.To all that aske what end I made,        and how I went away:Thou answer maist like those which heere,        no longer tary may.And unto all that wysh mee well,        or rue that I am gon:Doo me comend, and bid them cease        my absence for to mone.And tell them further, if they wolde,        my presence styll have had:They should have sought to mend my luck;        which ever was too bad.So fare thou well a thousand times,        God sheelde thee from thy foe:And styll make thee victorious,        of those that seeke thy woe.And (though I am perswade) that I        shall never more thee see:Yet to the last, I shal not cease        to wish much good to thee.This, xx. of October I,        in ANNO DOMINI:A Thousand: v. hundred seuenty three        as Alminacks descry.Did write this Wyll with mine owne hand        and it to London gaue:In witnes of the standers by,        whose names yf you wyll have.Paper, Pen and Standish were:        at that same present by:With Time, who promised to reveale,        so fast as she could hyeThe same: least of my nearer kyn,        for any thing should vary:So finally I make an end        no longer can I tary.

"
"

Because I to my brethern wrote        and to my sisters two:Good sister Anne, you this might wote,        if so I should not doTo you, or ere I parted hence,You vainly had bestowed expence.Yet is it not for that I write,        for nature did you bindTo do me good, and to requite        hath nature me inclined:Wherefore good sister take in greeThese simple lines that come from me.Wherein I wish you Nestor's days,        in happy health to rest:With such success in all assays        as those which God hath blest:Your husband with your pretty boys,God keep them free from all annoys.And grant if that my luck it be        to linger here so longTill they be men, that I may see        for learning them so strongThat they may march amongst the bestOf them which learning have possest.By that time will my aged years        perhaps a staff require:And quakingly as still in fears        my limbs draw to the fire:Yet joy I shall them so to see,If any joy in age there be.Good sister so I you commend        to him that made us all:I know you huswifery intend,        though I to writing fall:Wherefore no lenger shall you stayFrom business that profit may.Had I a husband, or a house,        and all that longs thereto,My self could frame about to rouse,        as other women do:But till some household cares me tie,My books and pen I will apply.

"
"

Those strokes which mates in mirth do give        do seem to be but light,Although sometime they leave a sign        seems grievous to the sight.He that is void of any friend,        him company to keep,Walks in a world of wilderness,        full fraught with dangers deep.Each lover knoweth what he likes        and what he doth desire,But seld, or never, doth he know        what thing he should require.Affection fond deceives the wise        and love makes men such noddiesThat to their selves they seem as dead        yet live in other bodies.Ask nothing of thy neighbour that        thou wouldst not let him have:Nor say him nay of that which thou        wouldst get if thou didst crave.Two eyes, two ears, and but one tongue        Dame Nature hath us framedThat we might see and hear much more        than should with tongue be named.Seek not each man to please, for that        is more than God bids do:Please thou the best, and neuer care,        what wicked say thereto.

"
"

decreed my mother-in-law as my husband

passed the platter of inward-turning

soft-skulled Martian baby

heads around the table,

and they were O so shyly slyly

jostling each other with their boiled-

green sardonic gossip

(what was the news they told?)

when he sharply answered, “Mother,

have you ever

eaten an artichoke?”

                               “No,”

she said, majestic, “but I just know

I don’t care for them, don’t

care for them at all”—

for truly, if they weren’t Martian

they were at the least Italian

from that land of “smelly cheese”

she wouldn’t eat, that land of oily

curves and stalks, unnerving pots

of churning who knows what,

and she, nice, Jewish, from the Bronx,

had fattened on her Russian-

Jewish mother’s kugel, kosher

chicken, good rye bread ....

Bearded, rosy, magisterial

at forty-five, he laughed,

kept plucking, kept on

licking those narcissistic

leaves, each with its razor point

defending the plump, the tender

secret at the center, each

a greave or plate of edible

armor, so she smiled too,

in the flash of dispute,

knowing he’d give her ice cream later,

all she wanted, as the rich

meal drew to an end

with sweets dished out in the lamplit

circle, to parents, children, grandma—

the chocolate mint she craved,

and rocky road he bought especially

for her, whose knees were just

beginning to crumble from arthritis,

whose heart would pump more creakily

each year, whose baby

fat would sag and sorrow

as her voice weakened, breathing

failed until she too

was gathered into the same

blank center

where her son

at sixty bearded still, still

laughing, magisterial

(though pallid now)

had just a year before

inexplicably settled.

"
"

The naked earth is warm with Spring,And with green grass and bursting treesLeans to the sun's gaze glorying,And quivers in the sunny breeze;And life is Colour and Warmth and Light,And a striving evermore for these;And he is dead who will not fight,And who dies fighting has increase.The fighting man shall from the sunTake warmth, and life from glowing earth;Speed with the light-foot winds to runAnd with the trees to newer birth;And find, when fighting shall be done,Great rest, and fulness after dearth.All the bright company of HeavenHold him in their bright comradeship,The Dog star, and the Sisters Seven,Orion's belt and sworded hip:The woodland trees that stand together,They stand to him each one a friend;They gently speak in the windy weather;They guide to valley and ridges end.The kestrel hovering by day,And the little owls that call by night,Bid him be swift and keen as they,As keen of ear, as swift of sight.The blackbird sings to him: ""Brother, brother,If this be the last song you shall sing,Sing well, for you may not sing another;Brother, sing.""In dreary doubtful waiting hours,Before the brazen frenzy starts,The horses show him nobler powers; —O patient eyes, courageous hearts!And when the burning moment breaks,And all things else are out of mind,And only joy of battle takesHim by the throat and makes him blind,Through joy and blindness he shall know,Not caring much to know, that stillNor lead nor steel shall reach him, soThat it be not the Destined Will.The thundering line of battle stands,And in the air Death moans and sings;But Day shall clasp him with strong hands,And Night shall fold him in soft wings.

"
"

O! say can you see, by the dawn's early light,    What so proudly we hail'd at the twilight's last gleaming,Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fight,    O'er the ramparts we watch'd, were so gallantly streaming?        And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air,        Gave proof through the night that our flag was still there —            O! say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave            O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave?On the shore, dimly seen through the mists of the deep,    Where the foe's haughty host in dread silence reposes,What is that which the breeze o'er the towering steep,    As it fitfully blows, half conceals, half discloses?        Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first beam,        In full glory reflected now shines on the stream —            'Tis the star-spangled banner, O! long may it wave            O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave.And where is that band who so vauntingly swore    That the havock of war and the battle's confusionA home and a country should leave us no more?    Their blood has wash'd out their foul foot-steps' pollution,        No refuge could save the hireling and slave,        From the terror of flight or the gloom of the grave;            And the star-spangled banner in triumph doth wave            O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave.O! thus be it ever when freemen shall stand    Between their lov'd home, and the war's desolation,Blest with vict'ry and peace, may the heav'n-rescued land    Praise the power that hath made and preserv'd us a nation!        Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,        And this be our motto — ""In God is our trust!""            And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall wave            O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave.

"
"



In a somer sesun, whon softe was the sonne,

I schop me into a shroud, as I a scheep were;

In habite as an hermite unholy of werkes

Wente I wyde in this world wondres to here;

Bote in a Mayes morwnynge on Malverne hulles

Me bifel a ferly, of fairie, me-thoughte.

I was wery, forwandred, and wente me to reste

Undur a brod banke bi a bourne side;

And as I lay and leonede and lokede on the watres,

I slumbrede in a slepynge, hit swyed so murie.

Thenne gon I meeten a mervelous sweven,

That I was in a wildernesse, wuste I never where;

And as I beheold into the est an heigh to the sonne,

I sauh a tour on a toft, tryelyche i-maket;

A deop dale bineothe, a dungun ther-inne,

With deop dich and derk and dredful of sighte.

A feir feld full of folk fond I ther bitwene,

Of alle maner of men, the mene and the riche,

Worchinge and wandringe as the world asketh.

Summe putten hem to the plough, pleiden ful seldene,

In settynge and in sowynge swonken ful harde,

And wonnen that theos wasturs with glotonye distruen.

And summe putten hem to pruide, apparaylden hem ther-after,

In cuntenaunce of clothinge comen disgisid.

To preyeres and to penaunce putten hem monye,

For love of ur Lord liveden ful streite,

In hope for to have hevene-riche blisse;

As ancres and hermytes that holdeth hem in heore celles,

Coveyte not in cuntré to cairen aboute,

For non likerous lyflode heore licam to plese.

And summe chosen chaffare to cheeven the bettre,

As hit semeth to ure sighte that suche men thryveth;

And summe, murthhes to maken as munstrals cunne,

And gete gold with here gle, giltles, I trowe.

Bote japers and jangelers, Judas children,

Founden hem fantasyes and fooles hem maaden,

And habbeth wit at heore wille to worchen yif hem luste.

That Poul precheth of hem, I dar not preoven heere;Qui loquitur turpiloquium he is Luciferes hyne.

Bidders and beggers faste aboute eoden,

Til heor bagges and heore balies weren bretful i-crommet;

Feyneden hem for heore foode, foughten atte ale;

In glotonye, God wot, gon heo to bedde,

And ryseth up with ribaudye this roberdes knaves;

Sleep and sleughthe suweth hem evere.

Pilgrimes and palmers plihten hem togederes

For to seche Seint Jame and seintes at Roome;

Wenten forth in heore wey with mony wyse tales,

And hedden leve to lyen al heore lyf aftir.

Ermytes on an hep with hokide staves,

Wenten to Walsyngham and here wenchis after;

Grete lobres and longe that loth weore to swynke

Clotheden hem in copes to beo knowen for bretheren;

And summe schopen hem to hermytes heore ese to have.

I fond there freres, all the foure ordres,

Prechinge the peple for profyt of heore wombes,

Glosynge the Gospel as hem good liketh,

For covetyse of copes construeth hit ille;

For monye of this maistres mowen clothen hem at lyking,

For moneye and heore marchaundie meeten togedere;

Seththe Charité hath be chapmon, and cheef to schriven lordes,

Mony ferlyes han bifalle in a fewe yeres.

But Holychirche and heo holde bet togedere,

The moste mischeef on molde is mountyng up faste.

Ther prechede a pardoner, as he a prest were,

And brought forth a bulle with bisschopes seles,

And seide that himself mighte asoylen hem alle

Of falsnesse and fastinge and of vouwes i-broken.

The lewede men levide him wel and likede his speche,

And comen up knelynge to kissen his bulle;

He bonchede hem with his brevet and blered heore eiyen,

And raughte with his ragemon ringes and broches.

Thus ye yiveth oure gold glotonis to helpen!

And leveth hit to losels that lecherie haunten.

Weore the bisschop i-blesset and worth bothe his eres,

His sel shulde not be sent to deceyve the peple.

It is not al bi the bisschop that the boye precheth,

Bote the parisch prest and the pardoner parte the selver

That the pore peple of the parisch schulde have yif that heo ne weore,

Persones and parisch prestes playneth to heore bisschops,

That heore parisch hath ben pore seththe the pestilence tyme,

To have a lycence and leve at Londun to dwelle,

To singe ther for simonye, for selver is swete.

Ther hovide an hundret in houves of selke,

Serjauns hit semide to serven atte barre;

Pleden for pens and poundes the lawe,

Not for love of ur Lord unloseth heore lippes ones,

Thou mightest beter meten the myst on Malverne hulles

Then geten a mom of heore mouth til moneye weore schewed!

I saugh ther bisschops bolde and bachilers of divyne

Bicoome clerkes of acounte the king for to serven.

Erchedekenes and denis, that dignité haven

To preche the peple and pore men to feede,

Beon lopen to Londun, bi leve of heore bisschopes,

To ben clerkes of the Kynges Benche the cuntré to schende

Barouns and burgeis and bonde-men also

I saugh in that semblé, as ye schul heren aftur,

Bakers, bochers, and breusters monye,

Wollene-websteris, and weveris of lynen,

Taillours, tanneris, and tokkeris bothe,

Masons, minours, and mony other craftes,

Dykers, and delvers, that don heore dedes ille,

And driveth forth the longe day with ""Deu vous save, Dam Emme!""

Cookes and heore knaves cryen ""Hote pies, hote!

""Goode gees and grys! Go we dyne, go we!""

Taverners to hem tolde the same tale,

With wyn of Oseye and win of Gaskoyne,

Of the Ryn and of the Rochel, the rost to defye,

Al this I saugh slepynge and seve sithes more.

"
"

I. THEIR BASIC SAVAGERY Fat black bucks in a wine-barrel room, Barrel-house kings, with feet unstable, Sagged and reeled and pounded on the table, Pounded on the table, Beat an empty barrel with the handle of a broom, Hard as they were able, Boom, boom, BOOM, With a silk umbrella and the handle of a broom, Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM. THEN I had religion, THEN I had a vision. I could not turn from their revel in derision. THEN I SAW THE CONGO, CREEPING THROUGH THE BLACK, CUTTING THROUGH THE FOREST WITH A GOLDEN TRACK. Then along that riverbank A thousand miles Tattooed cannibals danced in files; Then I heard the boom of the blood-lust song And a thigh-bone beating on a tin-pan gong. And “BLOOD” screamed the whistles and the fifes of the warriors, “BLOOD” screamed the skull-faced, lean witch-doctors, “Whirl ye the deadly voo-doo rattle, Harry the uplands, Steal all the cattle, Rattle-rattle, rattle-rattle, Bing. Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM,” A roaring, epic, rag-time tune From the mouth of the Congo To the Mountains of the Moon. Death is an Elephant, Torch-eyed and horrible, Foam-flanked and terrible. BOOM, steal the pygmies, BOOM, kill the Arabs, BOOM, kill the white men, HOO, HOO, HOO. Listen to the yell of Leopold’s ghost Burning in Hell for his hand-maimed host. Hear how the demons chuckle and yell Cutting his hands off, down in Hell. Listen to the creepy proclamation, Blown through the lairs of the forest-nation, Blown past the white-ants’ hill of clay, Blown past the marsh where the butterflies play: — “Be careful what you do, Or Mumbo-Jumbo, God of the Congo, And all of the other Gods of the Congo, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you.” II. THEIR IRREPRESSIBLE HIGH SPIRITS Wild crap-shooters with a whoop and a call Danced the juba in their gambling-hall And laughed fit to kill, and shook the town, And guyed the policemen and laughed them down With a boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM. THEN I SAW THE CONGO, CREEPING THROUGH THE BLACK, CUTTING THROUGH THE FOREST WITH A GOLDEN TRACK. A negro fairyland swung into view, A minstrel river Where dreams come true. The ebony palace soared on high Through the blossoming trees to the evening sky. The inlaid porches and casements shone With gold and ivory and elephant-bone. And the black crowd laughed till their sides were sore At the baboon butler in the agate door, And the well-known tunes of the parrot band That trilled on the bushes of that magic land. A troupe of skull-faced witch-men came Through the agate doorway in suits of flame, Yea, long-tailed coats with a gold-leaf crust And hats that were covered with diamond-dust. And the crowd in the court gave a whoop and a call And danced the juba from wall to wall. But the witch-men suddenly stilled the throng With a stern cold glare, and a stern old song: — “Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you.” ... Just then from the doorway, as fat as shotes, Came the cake-walk princes in their long red coats, Canes with a brilliant lacquer shine, And tall silk hats that were red as wine. And they pranced with their butterfly partners there, Coal-black maidens with pearls in their hair, Knee-skirts trimmed with the jassamine sweet, And bells on their ankles and little black-feet. And the couples railed at the chant and the frown Of the witch-men lean, and laughed them down. (O rare was the revel, and well worth while That made those glowering witch-men smile.) The cake-walk royalty then began To walk for a cake that was tall as a man To the tune of “Boomlay, boomlay, BOOM,” While the witch-men laughed, with a sinister air, And sang with the scalawags prancing there: — “Walk with care, walk with care, Or Mumbo-Jumbo, God of the Congo, And all the other Gods of the Congo, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you. Beware, beware, walk with care, Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom. Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom. Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, boom. Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM.” Oh rare was the revel, and well worth while That made those glowering witch-men smile. III. THE HOPE OF THEIR RELIGION A good old negro in the slums of the town Preached at a sister for her velvet gown. Howled at a brother for his low-down ways, His prowling, guzzling, sneak-thief days. Beat on the Bible till he wore it out Starting the jubilee revival shout. And some had visions, as they stood on chairs, And sang of Jacob, and the golden stairs, And they all repented, a thousand strong From their stupor and savagery and sin and wrong And slammed with their hymn books till they shook the room With “glory, glory, glory,” And “Boom, boom, BOOM.” THEN I SAW THE CONGO, CREEPING THROUGH THE BLACK, CUTTING THROUGH THE FOREST WITH A GOLDEN TRACK. And the gray sky opened like a new-rent veil And showed the Apostles with their coats of mail. In bright white steel they were seated round And their fire-eyes watched where the Congo wound. And the twelve Apostles, from their thrones on high Thrilled all the forest with their heavenly cry: — “Mumbo-Jumbo will die in the jungle; Never again will he hoo-doo you, Never again will he hoo-doo you.” Then along that river, a thousand miles The vine-snared trees fell down in files. Pioneer angels cleared the way For a Congo paradise, for babes at play, For sacred capitals, for temples clean. Gone were the skull-faced witch-men lean. There, where the wild ghost-gods had wailed A million boats of the angels sailed With oars of silver, and prows of blue And silken pennants that the sun shone through. ’Twas a land transfigured, ’twas a new creation. Oh, a singing wind swept the negro nation And on through the backwoods clearing flew: — “Mumbo-Jumbo is dead in the jungle. Never again will he hoo-doo you. Never again will he hoo-doo you. Redeemed were the forests, the beasts and the men, And only the vulture dared again By the far, lone mountains of the moon To cry, in the silence, the Congo tune:— “Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, “Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you. Mumbo ... Jumbo ... will ... hoo-doo ... you.”

"
"

In Flanders fields the poppies blowBetween the crosses, row on row,    That mark our place; and in the sky    The larks, still bravely singing, flyScarce heard amid the guns below.We are the Dead. Short days agoWe lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,    Loved and were loved, and now we lie,        In Flanders fields.Take up our quarrel with the foe:To you from failing hands we throw    The torch; be yours to hold it high.    If ye break faith with us who dieWe shall not sleep, though poppies grow        In Flanders fields.

"
"

We burrowed night and day with tools of lead,Heaped the bank up and cast it in a ringAnd hurled the earth above. And Caesar said,""Why, it is excellent. I like the thing.""We, who are dead,Made it, and wrought, and Caesar liked the thing.And here we strove, and here we felt each veinIce-bound, each limb fast-frozen, all night long.And here we held communion with the rainThat lashed us into manhood with its thong,Cleansing through pain.And the wind visited us and made us strong.Up from around us, numbers without name,Strong men and naked, vast, on either handPressing us in, they came. And the wind cameAnd bitter rain, turning grey all the land.That was our game,To fight with men and storms, and it was grand.For many days we fought them, and our sweatWatered the grass, making it spring up green,Blooming for us. And, if the wind was wet,Our blood wetted the wind, making it keenWith the hatredAnd wrath and courage that our blood had been.So, fighting men and winds and tempests, hotWith joy and hate and battle-lust, we fellWhere we fought. And God said, ""Killed at last then? What!Ye that are too strong for heaven, too clean for hell,(God said) stir not.This be your heaven, or, if ye will, your hell.""So again we fight and wrestle, and againHurl the earth up and cast it in a ring.But when the wind comes up, driving the rain(Each rain-drop a fiery steed), and the mists rollingUp from the plain,This wild procession, this impetuous thing.Hold us amazed. We mount the wind-cars, thenWhip up the steeds and drive through all the world,Searching to find somewhere some brethren,Sons of the winds and waters of the world.We, who were men,Have sought, and found no men in all this world.Wind, that has blown here always ceaselessly,Bringing, if any man can understand,Might to the mighty, freedom to the free;Wind, that has caught us, cleansed us, made us grand,Wind that is we(We that were men) — make men in all this land,That so may live and wrestle and hate that whenThey fall at last exultant, as we fell,And come to God, God may say, ""Do you come thenMildly enquiring, is it heaven or hell?Why! Ye were men!Back to your winds and rains. Be these your heaven and hell!""

"
"

From morn to midnight, all day through,I laugh and play as others do,I sin and chatter, just the sameAs others with a different name.And all year long upon the stageI dance and tumble and do rageSo vehemently, I scarcely seeThe inner and eternal me.I have a temple I do notVisit, a heart I have forgot,A self that I have never met,A secret shrine—and yet, and yetThis sanctuary of my soulUnwitting I keep white and whole,Unlatched and lit, if Thou should'st careTo enter or to tarry there.With parted lips and outstretched handsAnd listening ears Thy servant stands,Call Thou early, call Thou late,To Thy great service dedicate.

"
"

You are blind like us. Your hurt no man designed,And no man claimed the conquest of your land.But gropers both through fields of thought confinedWe stumble and we do not understand.You only saw your future bigly planned,And we, the tapering paths of our own mind,And in each other's dearest ways we stand,And hiss and hate. And the blind fight the blind.When it is peace, then we may view againWith new-won eyes each other's truer formAnd wonder. Grown more loving-kind and warmWe'll grasp firm hands and laugh at the old pain,When it is peace. But until peace, the stormThe darkness and the thunder and the rain.

"
"

When you see millions of the mouthless deadAcross your dreams in pale battalions go,Say not soft things as other men have said,That you'll remember. For you need not so.Give them not praise. For, deaf, how should they knowIt is not curses heaped on each gashed head?Nor tears. Their blind eyes see not your tears flow.Nor honour. It is easy to be dead.Say only this, “They are dead.” Then add thereto,“Yet many a better one has died before.”Then, scanning all the o'ercrowded mass, should youPerceive one face that you loved heretofore,It is a spook. None wears the face you knew.Great death has made all his for evermore.

"
"

 

                                 i         The World without Imagination

Nota: man is the intelligence of his soil,

The sovereign ghost. As such, the Socrates

Of snails, musician of pears, principium

And lex. Sed quaeritur: is this same wig

Of things, this nincompated pedagogue,

Preceptor to the sea? Crispin at sea

Created, in his day, a touch of doubt.

An eye most apt in gelatines and jupes,

Berries of villages, a barber's eye,

An eye of land, of simple salad-beds,

Of honest quilts, the eye of Crispin, hung

On porpoises, instead of apricots,

And on silentious porpoises, whose snouts

Dibbled in waves that were mustachios,

Inscrutable hair in an inscrutable world.

One eats one paté, even of salt, quotha.

It was not so much the lost terrestrial,

The snug hibernal from that sea and salt,

That century of wind in a single puff.

What counted was mythology of self,

Blotched out beyond unblotching. Crispin,

The lutanist of fleas, the knave, the thane,

The ribboned stick, the bellowing breeches, cloak

Of China, cap of Spain, imperative haw

Of hum, inquisitorial botanist,

And general lexicographer of mute

And maidenly greenhorns, now beheld himself,

A skinny sailor peering in the sea-glass.

What word split up in clickering syllables

And storming under multitudinous tones

Was name for this short-shanks in all that brunt?

Crispin was washed away by magnitude.

The whole of life that still remained in him

Dwindled to one sound strumming in his ear,

Ubiquitous concussion, slap and sigh,

Polyphony beyond his baton's thrust.

Could Crispin stem verboseness in the sea,

The old age of a watery realist,

Triton, dissolved in shifting diaphanes

Of blue and green? A wordy, watery age

That whispered to the sun's compassion, made

A convocation, nightly, of the sea-stars,

And on the cropping foot-ways of the moon

Lay grovelling. Triton incomplicate with that

Which made him Triton, nothing left of him,

Except in faint, memorial gesturings,

That were like arms and shoulders in the waves,

Here, something in the rise and fall of wind

That seemed hallucinating horn, and here,

A sunken voice, both of remembering

And of forgetfulness, in alternate strain.

Just so an ancient Crispin was dissolved.

The valet in the tempest was annulled.

Bordeaux to Yucatan, Havana next,

And then to Carolina. Simple jaunt.

Crispin, merest minuscule in the gates,

Dejected his manner to the turbulence.

The salt hung on his spirit like a frost,

The dead brine melted in him like a dew

Of winter, until nothing of himself

Remained, except some starker, barer self

In a starker, barer world, in which the sun

Was not the sun because it never shone

With bland complaisance on pale parasols,

Beetled, in chapels, on the chaste bouquets.

Against his pipping sounds a trumpet cried

Celestial sneering boisterously. Crispin

Became an introspective voyager.

Here was the veritable ding an sich, at last,

Crispin confronting it, a vocable thing,

But with a speech belched out of hoary darks

Noway resembling his, a visible thing,

And excepting negligible Triton, free

From the unavoidable shadow of himself

That lay elsewhere around him. Severance

Was clear. The last distortion of romance

Forsook the insatiable egotist. The sea

Severs not only lands but also selves.

Here was no help before reality.

Crispin beheld and Crispin was made new.

The imagination, here, could not evade,

In poems of plums, the strict austerity

Of one vast, subjugating, final tone.

The drenching of stale lives no more fell down.

What was this gaudy, gusty panoply?

Out of what swift destruction did it spring?

It was caparison of mind and cloud

And something given to make whole among

The ruses that were shattered by the large.

 

                                 iiConcerning the Thunderstorms of Yucatan

In Yucatan, the Maya sonneteers

Of the Caribbean amphitheatre,

In spite of hawk and falcon, green toucan

And jay, still to the night-bird made their plea,

As if raspberry tanagers in palms,

High up in orange air, were barbarous.

But Crispin was too destitute to find

In any commonplace the sought-for aid.

He was a man made vivid by the sea,

A man come out of luminous traversing,

Much trumpeted, made desperately clear,

Fresh from discoveries of tidal skies,

To whom oracular rockings gave no rest.

Into a savage color he went on.

How greatly had he grown in his demesne,

This auditor of insects! He that saw

The stride of vanishing autumn in a park

By way of decorous melancholy; he

That wrote his couplet yearly to the spring,

As dissertation of profound delight,

Stopping, on voyage, in a land of snakes,

Found his vicissitudes had much enlarged

His apprehension, made him intricate

In moody rucks, and difficult and strange

In all desires, his destitution's mark.

He was in this as other freemen are,

Sonorous nutshells rattling inwardly.

His violence was for aggrandizement

And not for stupor, such as music makes

For sleepers halfway waking. He perceived

That coolness for his heat came suddenly,

And only, in the fables that he scrawled

With his own quill, in its indigenous dew,

Of an aesthetic tough, diverse, untamed,

Incredible to prudes, the mint of dirt,

Green barbarism turning paradigm.

Crispin foresaw a curious promenade

Or, nobler, sensed an elemental fate,

And elemental potencies and pangs,

And beautiful barenesses as yet unseen,

Making the most of savagery of palms,

Of moonlight on the thick, cadaverous bloom

That yuccas breed, and of the panther's tread.

The fabulous and its intrinsic verse

Came like two spirits parlaying, adorned

In radiance from the Atlantic coign,

For Crispin and his quill to catechize.

But they came parlaying of such an earth,

So thick with sides and jagged lops of green,

So intertwined with serpent-kin encoiled

Among the purple tufts, the scarlet crowns,

Scenting the jungle in their refuges,

So streaked with yellow, blue and green and red

In beak and bud and fruity gobbet-skins,

That earth was like a jostling festival

Of seeds grown fat, too juicily opulent,

Expanding in the gold's maternal warmth.

So much for that. The affectionate emigrant found

A new reality in parrot-squawks.

Yet let that trifle pass. Now, as this odd

Discoverer walked through the harbor streets

Inspecting the cabildo, the façade

Of the cathedral, making notes, he heard

A rumbling, west of Mexico, it seemed,

Approaching like a gasconade of drums.

The white cabildo darkened, the façade,

As sullen as the sky, was swallowed up

In swift, successive shadows, dolefully.

The rumbling broadened as it fell. The wind,

Tempestuous clarion, with heavy cry,

Came bluntly thundering, more terrible

Than the revenge of music on bassoons.

Gesticulating lightning, mystical,

Made pallid flitter. Crispin, here, took flight.

An annotator has his scruples, too.

He knelt in the cathedral with the rest,

This connoisseur of elemental fate,

Aware of exquisite thought. The storm was one

Of many proclamations of the kind,

Proclaiming something harsher than he learned

From hearing signboards whimper in cold nights

Or seeing the midsummer artifice

Of heat upon his pane. This was the span

Of force, the quintessential fact, the note

Of Vulcan, that a valet seeks to own,

The thing that makes him envious in phrase.

And while the torrent on the roof still droned

He felt the Andean breath. His mind was free

And more than free, elate, intent, profound

And studious of a self possessing him,

That was not in him in the crusty town

From which he sailed. Beyond him, westward, lay

The mountainous ridges, purple balustrades,

In which the thunder, lapsing in its clap,

Let down gigantic quavers of its voice,

For Crispin to vociferate again.                                iii                 Approaching Carolina

The book of moonlight is not written yet

Nor half begun, but, when it is, leave room

For Crispin, fagot in the lunar fire,

Who, in the hubbub of his pilgrimage

Through sweating changes, never could forget

That wakefulness or meditating sleep,

In which the sulky strophes willingly

Bore up, in time, the somnolent, deep songs.

Leave room, therefore, in that unwritten book

For the legendary moonlight that once burned

In Crispin's mind above a continent.

America was always north to him,

A northern west or western north, but north,

And thereby polar, polar-purple, chilled

And lank, rising and slumping from a sea

Of hardy foam, receding flatly, spread

In endless ledges, glittering, submerged

And cold in a boreal mistiness of the moon.

The spring came there in clinking pannicles

Of half-dissolving frost, the summer came,

If ever, whisked and wet, not ripening,

Before the winter's vacancy returned.

The myrtle, if the myrtle ever bloomed,

Was like a glacial pink upon the air.

The green palmettoes in crepuscular ice

Clipped frigidly blue-black meridians,

Morose chiaroscuro, gauntly drawn.

How many poems he denied himself

In his observant progress, lesser things

Than the relentless contact he desired;

How many sea-masks he ignored; what sounds

He shut out from his tempering ear; what thoughts,

Like jades affecting the sequestered bride;

And what descants, he sent to banishment!

Perhaps the Arctic moonlight really gave

The liaison, the blissful liaison,

Between himself and his environment,

Which was, and is, chief motive, first delight,

For him, and not for him alone. It seemed

Elusive, faint, more mist than moon, perverse,

Wrong as a divagation to Peking,

To him that postulated as his theme

The vulgar, as his theme and hymn and flight,

A passionately niggling nightingale.

Moonlight was an evasion, or, if not,

A minor meeting, facile, delicate.

Thus he conceived his voyaging to be

An up and down between two elements,

A fluctuating between sun and moon,

A sally into gold and crimson forms,

As on this voyage, out of goblinry,

And then retirement like a turning back

And sinking down to the indulgences

That in the moonlight have their habitude.

But let these backward lapses, if they would,

Grind their seductions on him, Crispin knew

It was a flourishing tropic he required

For his refreshment, an abundant zone,

Prickly and obdurate, dense, harmonious

Yet with a harmony not rarefied

Nor fined for the inhibited instruments

Of over-civil stops. And thus he tossed

Between a Carolina of old time,

A little juvenile, an ancient whim,

And the visible, circumspect presentment drawn

From what he saw across his vessel's prow.

He came. The poetic hero without palms

Or jugglery, without regalia.

And as he came he saw that it was spring,

A time abhorrent to the nihilist

Or searcher for the fecund minimum.

The moonlight fiction disappeared. The spring,

Although contending featly in its veils,

Irised in dew and early fragrancies,

Was gemmy marionette to him that sought

A sinewy nakedness. A river bore

The vessel inward. Tilting up his nose,

He inhaled the rancid rosin, burly smells

Of dampened lumber, emanations blown

From warehouse doors, the gustiness of ropes,

Decays of sacks, and all the arrant stinks

That helped him round his rude aesthetic out.

He savored rankness like a sensualist.

He marked the marshy ground around the dock,

The crawling railroad spur, the rotten fence,

Curriculum for the marvellous sophomore.

It purified. It made him see how much

Of what he saw he never saw at all.

He gripped more closely the essential prose

As being, in a world so falsified,

The one integrity for him, the one

Discovery still possible to make,

To which all poems were incident, unless

That prose should wear a poem's guise at last.                             iv               The Idea of a Colony

Nota: his soil is man's intelligence.

That's better. That's worth crossing seas to find.

Crispin in one laconic phrase laid bare

His cloudy drift and planned a colony.

Exit the mental moonlight, exit lex,

Rex and principium, exit the whole

Shebang. Exeunt omnes. Here was prose

More exquisite than any tumbling verse:

A still new continent in which to dwell.

What was the purpose of his pilgrimage,

Whatever shape it took in Crispin's mind,

If not, when all is said, to drive away

The shadow of his fellows from the skies,

And, from their stale intelligence released,

To make a new intelligence prevail?

Hence the reverberations in the words

Of his first central hymns, the celebrants

Of rankest trivia, tests of the strength

Of his aesthetic, his philosophy,

The more invidious, the more desired.

The florist asking aid from cabbages,

The rich man going bare, the paladin

Afraid, the blind man as astronomer,

The appointed power unwielded from disdain.

His western voyage ended and began.

The torment of fastidious thought grew slack,

Another, still more bellicose, came on.

He, therefore, wrote his prolegomena,

And, being full of the caprice, inscribed

Commingled souvenirs and prophecies.

He made a singular collation. Thus:

The natives of the rain are rainy men.

Although they paint effulgent, azure lakes,

And April hillsides wooded white and pink,

Their azure has a cloudy edge, their white

And pink, the water bright that dogwood bears.

And in their music showering sounds intone.

On what strange froth does the gross Indian dote,

What Eden sapling gum, what honeyed gore,

What pulpy dram distilled of innocence,

That streaking gold should speak in him

Or bask within his images and words?

If these rude instances impeach themselves

By force of rudeness, let the principle

Be plain. For application Crispin strove,

Abhorring Turk as Esquimau, the lute

As the marimba, the magnolia as rose.

Upon these premises propounding, he

Projected a colony that should extend

To the dusk of a whistling south below the south.

A comprehensive island hemisphere.

The man in Georgia waking among pines

Should be pine-spokesman. The responsive man,

Planting his pristine cores in Florida,

Should prick thereof, not on the psaltery,

But on the banjo's categorical gut,

Tuck tuck, while the flamingos flapped his bays.

Sepulchral señors, bibbing pale mescal,

Oblivious to the Aztec almanacs,

Should make the intricate Sierra scan.

And dark Brazilians in their cafés,

Musing immaculate, pampean dits,

Should scrawl a vigilant anthology,

To be their latest, lucent paramour.

These are the broadest instances. Crispin,

Progenitor of such extensive scope,

Was not indifferent to smart detail.

The melon should have apposite ritual,

Performed in verd apparel, and the peach,

When its black branches came to bud, belle day,

Should have an incantation. And again,

When piled on salvers its aroma steeped

The summer, it should have a sacrament

And celebration. Shrewd novitiates

Should be the clerks of our experience.

These bland excursions into time to come,

Related in romance to backward flights,

However prodigal, however proud,

Contained in their afflatus the reproach

That first drove Crispin to his wandering.

He could not be content with counterfeit,

With masquerade of thought, with hapless words

That must belie the racking masquerade,

With fictive flourishes that preordained

His passion's permit, hang of coat, degree

Of buttons, measure of his salt. Such trash

Might help the blind, not him, serenely sly.

It irked beyond his patience. Hence it was,

Preferring text to gloss, he humbly served

Grotesque apprenticeship to chance event,

A clown, perhaps, but an aspiring clown.

There is a monotonous babbling in our dreams

That makes them our dependent heirs, the heirs

Of dreamers buried in our sleep, and not

The oncoming fantasies of better birth.

The apprentice knew these dreamers. If he dreamed

Their dreams, he did it in a gingerly way.

All dreams are vexing. Let them be expunged.

But let the rabbit run, the cock declaim.

Trinket pasticcio, flaunting skyey sheets,

With Crispin as the tiptoe cozener?

No, no: veracious page on page, exact.                                v                 A Nice Shady Home

Crispin as hermit, pure and capable,

Dwelt in the land. Perhaps if discontent

Had kept him still the pricking realist,

Choosing his element from droll confect

Of was and is and shall or ought to be,

Beyond Bordeaux, beyond Havana, far

Beyond carked Yucatan, he might have come

To colonize his polar planterdom

And jig his chits upon a cloudy knee.

But his emprize to that idea soon sped.

Crispin dwelt in the land and dwelling there

Slid from his continent by slow recess

To things within his actual eye, alert

To the difficulty of rebellious thought

When the sky is blue. The blue infected will.

It may be that the yarrow in his fields

Sealed pensive purple under its concern.

But day by day, now this thing and now that

Confined him, while it cosseted, condoned,

Little by little, as if the suzerain soil

Abashed him by carouse to humble yet

Attach. It seemed haphazard denouement.

He first, as realist, admitted that

Whoever hunts a matinal continent

May, after all, stop short before a plum

And be content and still be realist.

The words of things entangle and confuse.

The plum survives its poems. It may hang

In the sunshine placidly, colored by ground

Obliquities of those who pass beneath,

Harlequined and mazily dewed and mauved

In bloom. Yet it survives in its own form,

Beyond these changes, good, fat, guzzly fruit.

So Crispin hasped on the surviving form,

For him, of shall or ought to be in is.

Was he to bray this in profoundest brass

Arointing his dreams with fugal requiems?

Was he to company vastest things defunct

With a blubber of tom-toms harrowing the sky?

Scrawl a tragedian's testament? Prolong

His active force in an inactive dirge,

Which, let the tall musicians call and call,

Should merely call him dead? Pronounce amen

Through choirs infolded to the outmost clouds?

Because he built a cabin who once planned

Loquacious columns by the ructive sea?

Because he turned to salad-beds again?

Jovial Crispin, in calamitous crape?

Should he lay by the personal and make

Of his own fate an instance of all fate?

What is one man among so many men?

What are so many men in such a world?

Can one man think one thing and think it long?

Can one man be one thing and be it long?

The very man despising honest quilts

Lies quilted to his poll in his despite.

For realists, what is is what should be.

And so it came, his cabin shuffled up,

His trees were planted, his duenna brought

Her prismy blonde and clapped her in his hands,

The curtains flittered and the door was closed.

Crispin, magister of a single room,

Latched up the night. So deep a sound fell down

It was as if the solitude concealed

And covered him and his congenial sleep.

So deep a sound fell down it grew to be

A long soothsaying silence down and down.

The crickets beat their tambours in the wind,

Marching a motionless march, custodians.

In the presto of the morning, Crispin trod,

Each day, still curious, but in a round

Less prickly and much more condign than that

He once thought necessary. Like Candide,

Yeoman and grub, but with a fig in sight,

And cream for the fig and silver for the cream,

A blonde to tip the silver and to taste

The rapey gouts. Good star, how that to be

Annealed them in their cabin ribaldries!

Yet the quotidian saps philosophers

And men like Crispin like them in intent,

If not in will, to track the knaves of thought.

But the quotidian composed as his,

Of breakfast ribands, fruits laid in their leaves,

The tomtit and the cassia and the rose,

Although the rose was not the noble thorn

Of crinoline spread, but of a pining sweet,

Composed of evenings like cracked shutters flung

Upon the rumpling bottomness, and nights

In which those frail custodians watched,

Indifferent to the tepid summer cold,

While he poured out upon the lips of her

That lay beside him, the quotidian

Like this, saps like the sun, true fortuner.

For all it takes it gives a humped return

Exchequering from piebald fiscs unkeyed.                               vi           And Daughters with Curls

Portentous enunciation, syllable

To blessed syllable affined, and sound

Bubbling felicity in cantilene,

Prolific and tormenting tenderness

Of music, as it comes to unison,

Forgather and bell boldly Crispin's last

Deduction. Thrum, with a proud douceur

His grand pronunciamento and devise.

The chits came for his jigging, bluet-eyed,

Hands without touch yet touching poignantly,

Leaving no room upon his cloudy knee,

Prophetic joint, for its diviner young.

The return to social nature, once begun,

Anabasis or slump, ascent or chute,

Involved him in midwifery so dense

His cabin counted as phylactery,

Then place of vexing palankeens, then haunt

Of children nibbling at the sugared void,

Infants yet eminently old, then dome

And halidom for the unbraided femes,

Green crammers of the green fruits of the world,

Bidders and biders for its ecstasies,

True daughters both of Crispin and his clay.

All this with many mulctings of the man,

Effective colonizer sharply stopped

In the door-yard by his own capacious bloom.

But that this bloom grown riper, showing nibs

Of its eventual roundness, puerile tints

Of spiced and weathery rouges, should complex

The stopper to indulgent fatalist

Was unforeseen. First Crispin smiled upon

His goldenest demoiselle, inhabitant,

She seemed, of a country of the capuchins,

So delicately blushed, so humbly eyed,

Attentive to a coronal of things

Secret and singular. Second, upon

A second similar counterpart, a maid

Most sisterly to the first, not yet awake

Excepting to the motherly footstep, but

Marvelling sometimes at the shaken sleep.

Then third, a thing still flaxen in the light,

A creeper under jaunty leaves. And fourth,

Mere blusteriness that gewgaws jollified,

All din and gobble, blasphemously pink.

A few years more and the vermeil capuchin

Gave to the cabin, lordlier than it was,

The dulcet omen fit for such a house.

The second sister dallying was shy

To fetch the one full-pinioned one himself

Out of her botches, hot embosomer.

The third one gaping at the orioles

Lettered herself demurely as became

A pearly poetess, peaked for rhapsody.

The fourth, pent now, a digit curious.

Four daughters in a world too intricate

In the beginning, four blithe instruments

Of differing struts, four voices several

In couch, four more personæ, intimate

As buffo, yet divers, four mirrors blue

That should be silver, four accustomed seeds

Hinting incredible hues, four self-same lights

That spread chromatics in hilarious dark,

Four questioners and four sure answerers.

Crispin concocted doctrine from the rout.

The world, a turnip once so readily plucked,

Sacked up and carried overseas, daubed out

Of its ancient purple, pruned to the fertile main,

And sown again by the stiffest realist,

Came reproduced in purple, family font,

The same insoluble lump. The fatalist

Stepped in and dropped the chuckling down his craw,

Without grace or grumble. Score this anecdote

Invented for its pith, not doctrinal

In form though in design, as Crispin willed,

Disguised pronunciamento, summary,

Autumn's compendium, strident in itself

But muted, mused, and perfectly revolved

In those portentous accents, syllables,

And sounds of music coming to accord

Upon his law, like their inherent sphere,

Seraphic proclamations of the pure

Delivered with a deluging onwardness.

Or if the music sticks, if the anecdote

Is false, if Crispin is a profitless

Philosopher, beginning with green brag,

Concluding fadedly, if as a man

Prone to distemper he abates in taste,

Fickle and fumbling, variable, obscure,

Glozing his life with after-shining flicks,

Illuminating, from a fancy gorged

By apparition, plain and common things,

Sequestering the fluster from the year,

Making gulped potions from obstreperous drops,

And so distorting, proving what he proves

Is nothing, what can all this matter since

The relation comes, benignly, to its end?

So may the relation of each man be clipped.

"
"

This World is not Conclusion.

A Species stands beyond - 

Invisible, as Music -

But positive, as Sound -

It beckons, and it baffles - 

Philosophy, dont know - 

And through a Riddle, at the last - 

Sagacity, must go -

To guess it, puzzles scholars -

To gain it, Men have borne

Contempt of Generations

And Crucifixion, shown -

Faith slips - and laughs, and rallies - 

Blushes, if any see - 

Plucks at a twig of Evidence - 

And asks a Vane, the way - 

Much Gesture, from the Pulpit -

Strong Hallelujahs roll - 

Narcotics cannot still the Tooth

That nibbles at the soul -

"
"

As through marble or the lining of   

certain fish split open and scooped   

clean, this is the blue vein

that rides, where the flesh is even   

whiter than the rest of her, the splayed   

thighs mother forgets, busy struggling   

for command over bones: her own,   

those of the chaise longue, all

equally uncooperative, and there’s   

the wind, too. This is her hair, gone   

from white to blue in the air.

This is the black, shot with blue, of my dark   

daddy’s knuckles, that do not change, ever.   

Which is to say they are no more pale   

in anger than at rest, or when, as

I imagine them now, they follow

the same two fingers he has always used   

to make the rim of every empty blue

glass in the house sing.

Always, the same

blue-to-black sorrow

no black surface can entirely hide.

Under the night, somewhere

between the white that is nothing so much as   

blue, and the black that is, finally; nothing,   

I am the man neither of you remembers.   

Shielding, in the half-dark,

the blue eyes I sometimes forget

I don’t have. Pulling my own stoop-

shouldered kind of blues across paper.   

Apparently misinformed about the rumored   

stuff of dreams: everywhere I inquired,   

I was told look for blue.

"
"

I’d have you known! It puzzles me forever   

To hear, day in, day out, the words men use,   

But never a single word about you, never.   

Strange!—in your every gesture, worlds of news.   

On busses people talk. On curbs I hear them;   

In parks I listen, barbershop and bar.   

In banks they murmur, and I sidle near them;   

But none allude to you there. None so far.

I read books too, and turn the pages, spying:   

You must be there, one beautiful as you!   

But never, not by name. No planes are flying   

Your name in lacy trailers past the blue   

Marquees of heaven. No trumpets cry your fame.   

Strange!—how no constellations spell your name!

"
"

The toy

become the aesthetic archetype

As if

some patient peasant God

had rubbed and rubbed

the Alpha and Omega

of Form

into a lump of metal

A naked orientation

unwinged unplumed

the ultimate rhythm

has lopped the extremities

of crest and claw

from

the nucleus of flight

The absolute act

of art

conformed

to continent sculpture

—bare as the brow of Osiris—

this breast of revelation

an incandescent curve

licked by chromatic flames

in labyrinths of reflections

This gong

of polished hyperaesthesia

shrills with brass

as the aggressive light

strikes

its significance

The immaculate

conception

of the inaudible bird

occurs

in gorgeous reticence

"
"

In Jinotega women greeted us

with thousands of flowers roses

it was hard to tell the petals

on our faces and arms falling

then embraces and the Spanish language

which is a little like a descent of

petals pink and orange

Suddenly out of the hallway our

gathering place AMNLAE the

Asociación de Mujeres women

came running seat yourselves dear

guests from the north we announce

a play a dance a play the women

their faces mountain river Indian

European Spanish dark-haired

women

dance in gray-green

fatigues they dance the Contra who

circles the village waiting

for the young teacher the health worker

(these are the strategies) the farmer

in the high village walks out into the

morning toward the front which is a

circle of terror

they dance

the work of women and men they dance

the plowing of the fields they kneel

to the harrowing with the machetes they

dance the sowing of seed (which is always

a dance) and the ripening of corn the

flowers of grain they dance the harvest

they raise their machetes for

the harvest the machetes are high

but no!

out of the hallway in green and gray

come those who dance the stealth

of the Contra cruelly they

dance the ambush the slaughter of

the farmer they are the death dancers

who found the schoolteacher they caught

the boy who dancing brought seeds in

his hat all the way from Matagalpa they

dance the death of the mother the

father the rape of the daughter they

dance the child murdered the seeds

spilled and trampled they dance

sorrow sorrow

they dance the

search for the Contra and the defeat

they dance a comic dance they make a

joke of the puppetry of the Contra of

Uncle Sam who is the handler of puppets

they dance rage and revenge they place

the dead child (the real sleeping baby)

on two chairs which is the bier for

the little actor they dance prayer

bereavement sorrow they mourn

Is there applause for such theater?

Silence then come let us dance

together now you know the usual

dance of couples Spanish or North

American let us dance in twos and

threes let us make little circles let us

dance as though at a festival or in peace-

time together and alone whirling stamping

our feet bowing to one another

the children

gather petals from the floor to throw

at our knees we dance the children

too banging into us into each other and

one small boy dances alone pulling

at our skirts wait he screams stop!

he tugs at the strap of our camera Stop!

stop dancing I’m Carlos take a picture

of me No! Now! Right now! because

soon Look! See Pepe! even tomorrow

I could be dead like him

the music

catches its breath the music

jumping in the guitar and phonograph holds

still and waits no no we say Carlos

not you we put our fingers on his little

shoulder we touch his hair but one of

us is afraid for god’s sake take his

picture so we lift him up we photo-

graph him we pass him from one to

another we photograph him again and

again with each of us crying or

laughing with him in our arms

we dance

"
"

I know if I find you I will have to leave the earth

and go on out

     over the sea marshes and the brant in bays

and over the hills of tall hickory

and over the crater lakes and canyons

and on up through the spheres of diminishing air

past the blackset noctilucent clouds

           where one wants to stop and look

way past all the light diffusions and bombardments

up farther than the loss of sight

    into the unseasonal undifferentiated empty stark

 

And I know if I find you I will have to stay with the earth

inspecting with thin tools and ground eyes

trusting the microvilli sporangia and simplest

     coelenterates

and praying for a nerve cell

with all the soul of my chemical reactions

and going right on down where the eye sees only traces

 

You are everywhere partial and entire

You are on the inside of everything and on the outside

 

I walk down the path down the hill where the sweetgum

has begun to ooze spring sap at the cut

and I see how the bark cracks and winds like no other bark

chasmal to my ant-soul running up and down

and if I find you I must go out deep into your

    far resolutions

and if I find you I must stay here with the separate leaves

"
"



"
"

After the leaves have fallen, we return

To a plain sense of things. It is as if

We had come to an end of the imagination,

Inanimate in an inert savoir.

It is difficult even to choose the adjective

For this blank cold, this sadness without cause.

The great structure has become a minor house.

No turban walks across the lessened floors.

The greenhouse never so badly needed paint.

The chimney is fifty years old and slants to one side.

A fantastic effort has failed, a repetition

In a repetitiousness of men and flies.

Yet the absence of the imagination had

Itself to be imagined. The great pond,

The plain sense of it, without reflections, leaves,

Mud, water like dirty glass, expressing silence

Of a sort, silence of a rat come out to see,

The great pond and its waste of the lilies, all this

Had to be imagined as an inevitable knowledge,

Required, as a necessity requires.

"
"

Already one day has detached itself from all the rest up ahead.

It has my photograph in its soft pocket.

It wants to carry my breath into the past in its bag of wind.

I write poems to untie myself, to do penance and disappear

Through the upper right-hand corner of things, to say grace.

"
"

Why should I blame her that she filled my days With misery, or that she would of late Have taught to ignorant men most violent ways, Or hurled the little streets upon the great, Had they but courage equal to desire? What could have made her peaceful with a mind That nobleness made simple as a fire, With beauty like a tightened bow, a kind That is not natural in an age like this, Being high and solitary and most stern? Why, what could she have done, being what she is? Was there another Troy for her to burn?

"
"

Oh, Love, he went a-straying, A long time ago! I missed him in the Maying, When blossoms were of snow; So back I came by the old sweet way; And for I loved him so, wept that he came not with me, A long time ago! Wide open stood my chamber door, And one stepped forth to greet; Gray Grief, strange Grief, who turned me sore With words he spake so sweet. I gave him meat; I gave him drink; (And listened for Love’s feet.) How many years? I cannot think; In truth, I do not know— Ah, long time ago! Oh, love, he came not back again, Although I kept me fair; And each white May, in field and lane, I waited for him there! Yea, he forgot; but Grief stayed on, And in Love’s empty chair Doth sit and tell of days long gone— ’Tis more than I can bear! 

"
"

I stood inside myself

like a dead tree or a tower.

I pulled the rope

of braided hair

and high above me

a bell of leaves tolled.

Because my hand

stabbed its brother,

I said: Make it stone.

Because my tongue

spoke harshly, I said:

Make it dust.

                   And yet

it was not death, but

her body in its green dress

I longed for. That’s why

I stood for days in the field

until the grass turned black

and the rain came.

"
"

When I see you, who were so wise and cool, Gazing with silly sickness on that fool You’ve given your love to, your adoring hands Touch his so intimately that each understands, I know, most hidden things; and when I know Your holiest dreams yield to the stupid bow Of his red lips, and that the empty grace Of those strong legs and arms, that rosy face, Has beaten your heart to such a flame of love, That you have given him every touch and move, Wrinkle and secret of you, all your life, —Oh! then I know I’m waiting, lover-wife, For the great time when love is at a close, And all its fruit’s to watch the thickening nose And sweaty neck and dulling face and eye, That are yours, and you, most surely, till you die! Day after day you’ll sit with him and note The greasier tie, the dingy wrinkling coat; As prettiness turns to pomp, and strength to fat, And love, love, love to habit!                                                      And after that, When all that’s fine in man is at an end, And you, that loved young life and clean, must tend A foul sick fumbling dribbling body and old, When his rare lips hang flabby and can’t hold Slobber, and you’re enduring that worst thing, Senility’s queasy furtive love-making, And searching those dear eyes for human meaning, Propping the bald and helpless head, and cleaning A scrap that life’s flung by, and love’s forgotten,— Then you’ll be tired; and passion dead and rotten; And he’ll be dirty, dirty!                                                  O lithe and free And lightfoot, that the poor heart cries to see, That’s how I’ll see your man and you!—                                                                          But you —Oh, when that time comes, you’ll be dirty too!

"
"

Good-bye!—no, do not grieve that it is over,

   The perfect hour;

That the winged joy, sweet honey-loving rover,

   Flits from the flower.

Grieve not—it is the law. Love will be flying—

   Yes, love and all.

Glad was the living—blessed be the dying.

   Let the leaves fall.

"
"

The time is important here—not because this   

has been a long winter or because it is my first   

at home since childhood—but because there is so much   

else to be unsure of. We are on the brink of an invasion.   

At a time like this how is it that when I left only a week ago

there was three feet of snow on the ground,

and now there is none, not even a single patch   

on in the shadow of the fence-line.   

And to think I paid a cousin twenty dollars   

to shovel the walk. He and two of his buddies,   

still smelling of an all-nighter, arrived at 7 am   

to begin their work. When I left them a while later   

and noticed their ungloved hands, winter made me feel   

selfish and unsure. This ground seems unsure   

of itself for its own reasons

and we do not gauge enough of our lives   

by changes in temperature.

When I first began to write poems

I was laying claim to battle.

It started with a death that I tried to say

was unjust, not because of the actual

dying, but because of what was left.

What time of year was that?

I have still not yet learned to write of war.

I have friends who speak out—as is necessary—

with subtle and unsubtle force.

But I am from this place and a great deal

has been going wrong for some time now.

The two young Indian boys who almost drowned

last night in the fast-rising creek near school

are casualties in any case.

There have been too many just like them

and I have no way to fix these things.

A friend from Boston wrote something to me last week

about not having the intelligence

to take as subject for his poems

anything other than his own life.

For a while now I have sensed this in my own mood:

This poem was never supposed to mention

itself, other writers, or me.

But I will not regret that those boys made it home,

or that the cousins used the money at the bar.

Still, there are no lights on this street.

Still, there is so much mud outside

that we carry it indoors with us.

"
"







for Darlene Wind and James Welch












I think of Wind and her wild ways the year we had nothing to lose and lost it anyway in the cursed country of the fox. We still talk about that winter, how the cold froze imaginary buffalo on the stuffed horizon of snowbanks. The haunting voices of the starved and mutilated broke fences, crashed our thermostat dreams, and we couldn’t stand it one more time. So once again we lost a winter in stubborn memory, walked through cheap apartment walls, skated through fields of ghosts into a town that never wanted us, in the epic search for grace.


Like Coyote, like Rabbit, we could not contain our terror and clowned our way through a season of false midnights. We had to swallow that town with laughter, so it would go down easy as honey. And one morning as the sun struggled to break ice, and our dreams had found us with coffee and pancakes in a truck stop along Highway 80, we found grace.

   


I could say grace was a woman with time on her hands, or a white buffalo escaped from memory. But in that dingy light it was a promise of balance. We once again understood the talk of animals, and spring was lean and hungry with the hope of children and corn.

   


I would like to say, with grace, we picked ourselves up and walked into the spring thaw. We didn’t; the next season was worse. You went home to Leech Lake to work with the tribe and I went south. And, Wind, I am still crazy. I know there is something larger than the memory of a dispossessed people. We have seen it.

"
"

For ten days now, two luna moths remain

silk-winged and lavish as a double broach

pinned beneath the porch light of my cabin.

Two of them, patinaed that sea-glass green

of copper weather vanes nosing the wind,

the sun-lit green of rockweed, the lichen's

green scabbing-over of the bouldered shore,

the plush green peat that carpets the island,

that hushes, sinks then holds a boot print

for days, and the sapling-green of new pines

sprouting through it. The miraculous green

origami of their wings - false eyed, doomed

and sensual as the mermaid's long green fins:

a green siren calling from the moonlight.

A green siren calling from the moonlight,

from the sweet gum leaves and paper birches

that shed, like tiny white decrees, scrolled bark.

They emerge from cocoons like greased hinges,

all pheromone and wing, instinct and flutter.

They rise, hardwired, driven, through the creaking

pine branches tufted with beard moss and fog.

Two luna moths flitting like exotic birds

towards only each other and light, in these

their final few days, they mate, then starving

they wait, inches apart, on my cabin wall

to die, to share fully each pure and burning

moment. They are, like desire itself, born

without mouths. What, if not this, is love?

"
"

In the sixth grade I was chased home by

the Gatlin kids, three skinny sisters

in rolled-down bobby socks. HissingBrainiac! and Mrs. Stringbean!, they trod my heel.

I knew my body was no big deal

but never thought to retort: who's

calling who skinny? (Besides, I knew

they'd beat me up.) I survived

their shoves across the schoolyard

because my five-foot-zero mother drove up

in her Caddie to shake them down to size.

Nothing could get me into that car.

I took the long way home, swore

I'd show them all: I would grow up.

"
"

Imagine you wake up

with a second chance: The blue jay

hawks his pretty wares

and the oak still stands, spreading

glorious shade. If you don't look back,

the future never happens.

How good to rise in sunlight,

in the prodigal smell of biscuits -

eggs and sausage on the grill.

The whole sky is yours

to write on, blown open

to a blank page. Come on,

shake a leg! You'll never know

who's down there, frying those eggs,

if you don't get up and see.

"
"

Luggage first, the lining of his suit jacket dangling

As always, just when you’d given up hope

Nimbly he backs out of the taxi

Eyes nervously extending, like brave crabs

Everywhere at once, keeping track of his papers

He pilots himself into the home berth

Like a small tug in a cloud of seagulls

Worries flutter around him so thick

It takes him some time to arrive

And you wonder if he’s ever really been happy:

When the blue eyes blur

And stare out to sea

Whether it’s only a daydream

Or a long pain that silences him

In such gray distances

You’ll never know, but now

Turning to you, the delicate mouth

Like a magician

Is curious, sensitive, playing tricks,

Pouting like a wise turtle

It seems he has a secret

With the driver,

With the stewardess on the airplane

So that even when he opens his arms

When the warm voice surrounds you,

Wraps you in rough bliss,

Just before you go under

Suddenly you remember:

The beloved does not come

From nowhere: out of himself, alone

Often he comes slowly, carefully

After a long taxi ride

Past many beautiful men and women

And many dead bodies,

Mysterious and important companions.

"
"

You’re worried, so you wake her & you talk into the dark: Do you think I have cancer, you say, or Were there worms in that meat"
"

No matter how she tilts her head to hear

she sees the irritation in their eyes.

She knows how they can read a small rejection,

a little judgment, in every What did you say?

So now she doesn’t say What? or Come again?

She lets the syllables settle, hoping they form

some sort of shape that she might recognize.

When they don’t, she smiles with everyone else,

and then whoever was talking turns to her

and says, “Break wooden coffee, don’t you know?”

She pulls all she can focus into the face

to know if she ought to nod or shake her head.

In that long space her brain talks to itself.

The person may turn away as an act of mercy,

leaving her there in a room full of understanding

with nothing to cover her, neither sound nor silence .

"
"

The gowns and dresses hang like fleece in their glaring whiteness, sheepskin-softness,    the ruffled matrimonial love in which the brides- in-waiting dance around, expectantly, hummingbirds to tulips.   I was dragged here: David’s Bridal, off the concrete-gray arterial highways of a naval town.   I sink into the flush bachelors’ couch, along with other men sprinkled throughout the shop, as my friend and her female compatriots parade taffeta dresses in monstrous shades of pastels—persimmons, lilacs, periwinkles—the colors of weddings and religious holidays.   Trains drag on the floor, sleeves drape like limp, pressed sheets of candied fruits, ribbons fluttering like pale leaves.   I watch families gathered together: the women, like worshippers, circling around the smiling brides-to-be, as if they were the anointed ones.   The men, in turn, submerge deeper into couches, into sleep, while the haloed, veiled women cannot contain their joy, they flash their winning smiles, and they are beautiful.

"
"

My mother would be a falconress,

And I, her gay falcon treading her wrist,

would fly to bring back

from the blue of the sky to her, bleeding, a prize,

where I dream in my little hood with many bells

jangling when I'd turn my head.

My mother would be a falconress,

and she sends me as far as her will goes.

She lets me ride to the end of her curb

where I fall back in anguish.

I dread that she will cast me away,

for I fall, I mis-take, I fail in her mission.

She would bring down the little birds.

And I would bring down the little birds.

When will she let me bring down the little birds,

pierced from their flight with their necks broken,

their heads like flowers limp from the stem?

I tread my mother's wrist and would draw blood.

Behind the little hood my eyes are hooded.

I have gone back into my hooded silence,

talking to myself and dropping off to sleep.

For she has muffled my dreams in the hood she has made me,

sewn round with bells, jangling when I move.

She rides with her little falcon upon her wrist.

She uses a barb that brings me to cower.

She sends me abroad to try my wings

and I come back to her. I would bring down

the little birds to her

I may not tear into, I must bring back perfectly.

I tear at her wrist with my beak to draw blood,

and her eye holds me, anguisht, terrifying.

She draws a limit to my flight.

Never beyond my sight, she says.

She trains me to fetch and to limit myself in fetching.

She rewards me with meat for my dinner.

But I must never eat what she sends me to bring her.

Yet it would have been beautiful, if she would have carried me,

always, in a little hood with the bells ringing,

at her wrist, and her riding

to the great falcon hunt, and me

flying up to the curb of my heart from her heart

to bring down the skylark from the blue to her feet,

straining, and then released for the flight.

My mother would be a falconress,

and I her gerfalcon raised at her will,

from her wrist sent flying, as if I were her own

pride, as if her pride

knew no limits, as if her mind

sought in me flight beyond the horizon.

Ah, but high, high in the air I flew.

And far, far beyond the curb of her will,

were the blue hills where the falcons nest.

And then I saw west to the dying sun--

it seemd my human soul went down in flames.

I tore at her wrist, at the hold she had for me,

until the blood ran hot and I heard her cry out,

far, far beyond the curb of her will

to horizons of stars beyond the ringing hills of the world where the falcons nest

I saw, and I tore at her wrist with my savage beak.

I flew, as if sight flew from the anguish in her eye beyond her sight,

sent from my striking loose, from the cruel strike at her wrist,

striking out from the blood to be free of her.

My mother would be a falconress,

and even now, years after this,

when the wounds I left her had surely heald,

and the woman is dead,

her fierce eyes closed, and if her heart

were broken, it is stilld

I would be a falcon and go free.

I tread her wrist and wear the hood,

talking to myself, and would draw blood.

"
"

I.

The empty of stomach

manifests silence

a stillness

that levels

coffee in a cup

and in a respectful manner

allows steam to penetrate

the surface.

Reversal of action

has created my sandstone canyon

rooted cedar and sage at my feet.

This movement is where

a tranquility stems.

II.

When my child creates

bubbles through a soapy wand,

I occupy the action of fate

that bursts the perfect form.

A halcyon absorbed

nesting within

the existence of the form

that no longer exists.

The formless form

is where my mind floats.

III.

It is easy to give form

especially with English words

a promotion of mechanical ligaments

binding spirit with assembly-fabricated molds.

Just as my hair poses an appendage of my brain

my tongue poses an appendage of my heart.

I cannot classify this thought as a typewritten symbol.

An ideogram of essence

cultivates my stillness to action.

 

"
"

Start this with the invocation:             a seventy-seven Pinto,             an eastbound freeway, two boysa few months from their driver’s license.It happens again because you’ve             said it. You sit in the back seat,             a ghost of red vinyl, to listento these boys—one of whom was you,the one along for the ride—talk              brave about cheerleaders              and socket wrenches as they passa stolen cigarette between them.They don’t know you’re there,              wouldn’t believe in you should              they look backstage, backseat.The boys are driving back from an Octoberorchard where they’d gone to see leaves              change. You remember: orange, brown,              as though you’d just seen those leaves,because in this proximityto yourself—the boy in the passenger               seat—you are thinking the               same thing, and each of your in-carnations feels like they’ve thought thisbefore. Your ghost, your present tense               thinks that maybe this isn’t right.               Now you’re along for the ride.These boys haven’t cuffed up againsttheir own mortality yet, though one               of them is sick. The other one,               driving and picking at the thinhair falling from his scalp, will diesoon, because what lurks in his dark               blood can be cured by medical               science. And that cure is what willkill him, as it leaves him weak,unable to fight off infection               in his lungs. But that comes later.               You are here with them now to findout what you owe to whom—your life,mortgaged to one of these boys               and you’ve never been able to               rectify that debt. You are thestage direction, a ghost backstage,wanting a spotlight, a soapbox               a soliloquy. Dissolve               back into your life, like sugarin tea—exit this scene now, stage left.                               *You are the apparition again               in your mother’s house. You follow               yourself down the yellow hallwayto the ringing phone in the kitchen.You already know who’s calling,               the way you knew then—when you were                the self you’re haunting. Your friendis dead. You know this even before his sister tells you—but because your               ghost is too close, the boy can feel               your grief, but can’t feel his own.And you did know then, didn’t you?You knew that morning, that the earth               awakes closest to the sun—four               days into every new year.And Lazarus, dead now, four days.Roll away the stone. Believe               in something besides the past.               Awaken from this dream likea man called out from a cave.It happens this way each time:               a bourbon breakdown in January               rain—weeping an invocation,cursing corollary.                               *Can you go to Tom’s grave today               and mandate him back to this life?               Should you cue him from the winglike a stage direction? Would hedamn you—a sadness, a gravestone               on your chest, for calling him               into this mortal suffering?If you had been in Houston that dayhe’d have died anyway. You’re a fool               to think you can bargain across the river.               Haunting the past won’t stopit from happening each time, exactly the same way. Won’t stop your heart               from breaking like a glass decanter,               brown whisky sliding mercury across the tile.

"
"

On humming rubber along this white concrete,

lighthearted between the gravities

of source and destination like a man

halfway to the moon

in this bubble of tuneless whistling

at seventy miles an hour from the windvents,

over prairie swells rising

and falling, over the quick offramp

that drops to its underpass and the truck

thundering beneath as I cross

with the country music twanging out my windows,

I'm grooving down this highway feeling

technology is freedom's other name when

—a meadowlark

comes sailing across my windshield

with breast shining yellow

and five notes pierce

the windroar like a flash

of nectar on mind,

gone as the country music swells up and drops

                                me wheeling down

                      my notch of cement-bottomed sky

                             between home and away

and wanting

to move again through country that a bird

has defined wholly with song,

and maybe next time see how

                         he flies so easy, when he sings.

"
"







                    I drew solitude over me, on the long shore.


                                        —Robinson Jeffers, “Prelude”  




          For whoever does not afflict his soul through this day, shall be


          cut off from his people.


                                                                           —Leviticus 23:29









What is a Jew in solitude?

What would it mean not to feel lonely or afraid

far from your own or those you have called your own?

What is a woman in solitude:   a queer woman or man?

In the empty street, on the empty beach, in the desert

what in this world as it is can solitude mean?

 

The glassy, concrete octagon suspended from the cliffs

with its electric gate, its perfected privacy

is not what I mean

the pick-up with a gun parked at a turn-out in Utah or the Golan Heights

is not what I mean

the poet’s tower facing the western ocean, acres of forest planted to the east, the woman reading in the cabin, her attack dog suddenly risen

is not what I mean

 

Three thousand miles from what I once called home

I open a book searching for some lines I remember

about flowers, something to bind me to this coast as lilacs in the dooryard once

bound me back there—yes, lupines on a burnt mountainside,

something that bloomed and faded and was written down

in the poet’s book, forever:

Opening the poet’s book

I find the hatred in the poet’s heart: . . . the hateful-eyedand human-bodied are all about me: you that love multitude may have them

 

Robinson Jeffers, multitude

is the blur flung by distinct forms against these landward valleys

and the farms that run down to the sea; the lupines

are multitude, and the torched poppies, the grey Pacific unrolling its scrolls of surf,

and the separate persons, stooped

over sewing machines in denim dust, bent under the shattering skies of harvest

who sleep by shifts in never-empty beds have their various dreams

Hands that pick, pack, steam, stitch, strip, stuff, shell, scrape, scour, belong to a brain like no other

Must I argue the love of multitude in the blur or defend

a solitude of barbed-wire and searchlights, the survivalist’s final solution, have I a choice?

 

To wonder far from your own or those you have called your own

to hear strangeness calling you from far away

and walk in that direction, long and far, not calculating risk

to go to meet the Stranger without fear or weapon, protection nowhere on your mind

(the Jew on the icy, rutted road on Christmas Eve prays for another Jew

the woman in the ungainly twisting shadows of the street:   Make those be a woman’s footsteps; as if she could believe in a woman’s god)

 

Find someone like yourself.   Find others.

Agree you will never desert each other.

Understand that any rift among you

means power to those who want to do you in.

Close to the center, safety; toward the edges, danger.

But I have a nightmare to tell:   I am trying to say

that to be with my people is my dearest wish

but that I also love strangers

that I crave separateness

I hear myself stuttering these words

to my worst friends and my best enemies

who watch for my mistakes in grammar

my mistakes in love.

This is the day of atonement; but do my people forgive me?

If a cloud knew loneliness and fear, I would be that cloud.

 

To love the Stranger, to love solitude—am I writing merely about privilege

about drifting from the center, drawn to edges,

a privilege we can’t afford in the world that is,

who are hated as being of our kind: faggot kicked into the icy river, woman dragged from her stalled car

into the mist-struck mountains, used and hacked to death

young scholar shot at the university gates on a summer evening walk, his prizes and studies nothing, nothing availing his Blackness

Jew deluded that she’s escaped the tribe, the laws of her exclusion, the men too holy to touch her hand;   Jew who has turned her back

on midrash and mitzvah (yet wears the chai on a thong between her breasts) hiking alone

found with a swastika carved in her back at the foot of the cliffs (did she die as queer or as Jew?)

 

Solitude, O taboo, endangered species

on the mist-struck spur of the mountain, I want a gun to defend you

In the desert, on the deserted street, I want what I can’t have:

your elder sister, Justice, her great peasant’s hand outspread

her eye, half-hooded, sharp and true 

 

And I ask myself, have I thrown courage away?

have I traded off something I don’t name?

To what extreme will I go to meet the extremist?

What will I do to defend my want or anyone’s want to search for her spirit-vision

far from the protection of those she has called her own?

Will I find O solitude

your plumes, your breasts, your hair

against my face, as in childhood, your voice like the mockingbird’s

singing Yes, you are loved, why else this song?

in the old places, anywhere?

 

What is a Jew in solitude?

What is a woman in solitude, a queer woman or man?

When the winter flood-tides wrench the tower from the rock, crumble the prophet’s headland, and the farms slide into the sea

when leviathan is endangered and Jonah becomes revenger

when center and edges are crushed together, the extremities crushed together on which the world was founded

when our souls crash together, Arab and Jew, howling our loneliness within the tribes

when the refugee child and the exile’s child re-open the blasted and forbidden city

when we who refuse to be women and men as women and men are chartered, tell our stories of solitude spent in multitude

in that world as it may be, newborn and haunted, what will solitude mean?

 

1984-1985

"
"

Julius Caesar’s head was cut off

and fed to the barbarians waiting

outside the walls of Rome.

Salvador Dali wore one orange

sock and a white one on days

he went to eat breakfast in cafes.

On days he stared at the wall,

he did not wear socks.

 

Yukio Mishima sheathed his knives

in wall of whale oil, claiming such

creatures were the only ones that

understood the art of sacrifice.

The last thing John Lennon saw

before he was gunned down was

the brick wall of his apartment house.

 

Sitting Bull had fourteen wives

he lined up against the cliff walls.

He would close his eyes and walk

blindly to them with an erection,

promising he would take the first

one his erection touched.

Crazy Horse watched silently

from the cliff walls above.

 

J. D. Salinger scribbled on his bedroom

walls as a boy, promising his mother

to whitewash the figures the first

time he was caught.

Joan of Arc climbed over the walls

and fell on top of a castle guard,

the commotion bringing soldiers

who swore the wall opened and

she escaped by stepping through.

 

Nikita Khrushchev stared at the wall

of nuclear buttons and knew

it was a green one they told him to push,

but the triggers were every color except green.

Hernán Cortés’ men met a wall

of arrows, then turned and ran.

Montezuma’s men met a wall of armor,

wept, then stoned their chief off the wall

for helping the conquistadores.

 

Carl Jung opened his eyes to find himself

sleeping against a wall of flowers,

the beautiful smell giving him the answer

he had been looking for.

Charlie Chaplin ordered his crew to remove

the hidden mirror from the wall, footage

of his latest lover overflowing

onto the studio floor.

 

Sor Juana de la Cruz hid her new poem

in a hole in the wall, but when a fellow nun

went to retrieve it after Sor Juana’s death,

it was gone.

The Dalai Lama stopped in the snow

and bowed his head to pray before the wall

of dead monks killed by the Chinese.

 

Virginia Woolf’s last memory before drowning

was the wall of family portraits, the photographs

of her father and brothers so radiant in the river fog.

Billy the Kid simply dug a hole in the adobe wall

of the jail with his bare hands and walked away.

 

Janis Joplin was found dead of an overdose

in her Los Angeles hotel, her face facing the wall.

Federico García Lorca did not face any walls

when he was shot under the trees.

 

No one knows how Tu Fu encased himself

in a wall of bamboo, staying inside the tube

for ten years, never saying a word, his feet

becoming the roots of bamboo within

the first few months of his silence.

Al Capone stared at the walls of his cell

in Alcatraz and added the bank figures again,

trying to get them right.

 

Babe Ruth heard a thud against the wall

of his hotel suite, the baseball rolling down

the hallways as a signal his tryst with the team

owner’s wife about to be revealed.

William Shakespeare stared at the empty walls

of the theatre, stood there without saying

a word, and stared at the empty walls of the theatre.

 

Geronimo extended his arms over the walls

of rock, the approaching sound of the cavalry

troops echoing down the canyon, the pictograph

Geronimo carved high on the wall, years ago,

lifting him to safety.

Two days before Salvador Allende was assassinated,

Pablo Neruda, dying of cancer, woke at Isla Negra

to find the walls of the room where he lay

were covered in hundreds of clinging starfish.

"
"

For those who ran in the streets,

there were no faces to welcome them back.

José escaped and loved the war.

 

For those who swam with bitterness

of a scorched love,

there was a rusted car to work on.

 

For those who merely passed

and reclined in prayer,

there was the tower and the cross.

 

For those who dedicated tongues

to the living and dying,

there were turquoise painted doorways.

 

For those who left their children

tied to the water heater,

there was a shout and a name.

 

For those whose world

was real and beautiful,

there was a cigarette and a saint.

 

For those who asked José

to stay and feed his children,

there were flowers at their funerals.

 

For those who carried a shovel

tattooed on their backs,

there was a wet towel and a bottle.

 

For those who swept the street

of superstition and lie,

there was the house to come home to.

 

For those who came home late

and put their swollen feet up,

there was love and the smell of dirty socks.

 

For those who feared the devil

and spit on his painted arms,

there was a lesson in rosaries.

 

For those who had to leave

before the sun went down,

there was asphalt and a bus.

 

For those who stared at wet plaster

and claimed the face of Christ appeared,

there was confinement and stale bread.

 

For those who talked with each other

and said it was time to go,

there was lead in the paint and on the tongue.

 

For those who left children behind,

there was a strange world

of sulphur and sparrow nests.

 

For those who accused their ancestors

of eating salt, there were these hands

tracing what was left after the sweat.

"
"

Kick in the heart.

Kick the starting lance.

Throw the ground a word and stand back.

The color of terror is the envy

on body rags, the dragonfly war

scraped off a painting inside the door.

 

Kick the shame.

Kick the falling dawn as fortunate.

Throw the corrupted guest out the door.

A sequence of rhythms bound for

the light on your bed.

On the eggplant cooked for the husband

working late: an ant, a hair—

the only thing said to race the mind.

Take someone else’s voice and touch their ears.

Make sure they hear you cry

in their own whispers, their harangue.

 

Kick the soil.

Kick the sweet drowning as if you know

the round jubilance of pear is afraid

of a darkening spoon, a honey of flavor,

the tender one who never touches your plate.

The tired one who rations food

to thank God eternity is here and there.

 

Slip the eye the blue-black stranger,

his instrument of scars and neglect,

its tune of every wish besides

the grave of a careless, quiet man.

Shape his sound into the thumb asking

for a ride in the years of not going anywhere.

 

Kick the alphabet.

Kick the hungry thigh and try again.

Reduce yourself to a moving mouth, a solemn happiness

that smells of the past, takes hold of the throat

and teaches you to despise omens—

ignore Apache mirrors on rock arches

as if you knew what their scratchings meant.

 

Kick the heart.

Kick the starting lance.

It moves deeper into the month of blinking neon

where vertigo is perfume, desire foaming

on your bare feet killed by frost,

taken by the animal waking inside your holy cross—

a figure of green gowns and things

that follows you until you dance.

 

Kick the truth.

Kick the belly until it confesses.

Admit you were fed by a woman

flapping in the wind, told to sit there by a father

who made her give birth to a shimmering head,

your brain of flowers blossoming upon

the body always first to confess.

 

What snow is left is tired water unmoved by your

seasonal words, your circle healing by slowing down,

swelling to the size of God,

yellow leaves in the blood nothing dangerous—

this impulse, this kick to the brittle lake

where the snow goes away.

"
"

I called the white donkey that hurt my left shoulder

the last time it appeared, ramming me

with its ivory head, cracking my back

to relieve me of worry and hope.

I called the white donkey,

surprised at the sound of my voice.

Scared, I wondered if the white head

would give me its donkey brain,

snowy matter dripping into my ears

like the horse of the first man who fell off,

the donkey teaching me about desire

and the moan, that white hair on the back

of my head that warns me.

 

I called the donkey.

It came slowly toward me,

huge ears shaking with fury,

its breath turning the air white

as it bit into the white apple

of my throat.

I faced the donkey, watched

its gait become a shuffle of possession,

shaking its head as it stopped to

root its dirty hoofs in the ground.

 

I stepped back and clicked my fingers,

but it would not come closer, its snort

commanding I listen as it farted.

I walked away and did not know it was

I who yearned for labor of the ass

because the animal I summoned

couldn’t remove the white scar from

my heart, a blind life I lived for good.

"
"



"
"

Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy!

The world is holy! The soul is holy! The skin is holy! The nose is holy! The tongue and cock and hand and asshole holy!

Everything is holy! everybody’s holy! everywhere is holy! everyday is in eternity! Everyman’s an angel!

The bum’s as holy as the seraphim! the madman is holy as you my soul are holy!

The typewriter is holy the poem is holy the voice is holy the hearers are holy the ecstasy is holy!

Holy Peter holy Allen holy Solomon holy Lucien holy Kerouac holy Huncke holy Burroughs holy Cassady holy the unknown buggered and suffering beggars holy the hideous human angels!

Holy my mother in the insane asylum! Holy the cocks of the grandfathers of Kansas!

Holy the groaning saxophone! Holy the bop apocalypse! Holy the jazzbands marijuana hipsters peace peyote pipes & drums!

Holy the solitudes of skyscrapers and pavements! Holy the cafeterias filled with the millions! Holy the mysterious rivers of tears under the streets!

Holy the lone juggernaut! Holy the vast lamb of the middleclass! Holy the crazy shepherds of rebellion! Who digs Los Angeles IS Los Angeles!

Holy New York Holy San Francisco Holy Peoria & Seattle Holy Paris Holy Tangiers Holy Moscow Holy Istanbul!

Holy time in eternity holy eternity in time holy the clocks in space holy the fourth dimension holy the fifth International holy the Angel in Moloch!

Holy the sea holy the desert holy the railroad holy the locomotive holy the visions holy the hallucinations holy the miracles holy the eyeball holy the abyss!

Holy forgiveness! mercy! charity! faith! Holy! Ours! bodies! suffering! magnanimity!

Holy the supernatural extra brilliant intelligent kindness of the soul!

 

 

                                                                                                            Berkeley 1955

"
"

The kinship with those humans

who speak directly to me

is webbed to the ceiling.

An economy of satellites, a cosmos,

where revision we think

comes without the benefit

of our witness. A peculiar time

when stars with modest faces

sleep in enormity and mirror

death like a child’s infirmity that

despite socio-economics

is still an illness,

definitive as fading paint

grossing a distant

understanding from a stain

pooled from its center

resonant of some terrific

nucleus making sense

of its own words

with the strangest electricity.

"
"

I can’t tell you I had climbed for hours on

ledges and crawled through gaps in the earth.

 

My hands negotiating

through the teeth of the palisade

lipped under the vineyard of temperate skies.

 

And I can’t tell you that I came

onto a ledge within the shelter of a granite roof,

ceaselessly carved by centuries of dripping water.

 

Feeding from pooled water and singular sunlight

a chamisa plant sat like a chopped wood.

 

The opposite end of root

speaking for its entirety through

silence and color.

 

And I wish I could tell you that at the moment

I met its splitting scent under the enormity of stone

your name appeared in my throat with clarity.

 

And I wish we were old

and in front of a grand painting,

a picture or postcard of

Picasso’s “Guernica” perhaps.

It would be then that I would tell you

Picasso once said that it took him his entire life

to learn how to paint like a child.

 

It would be through these words

that would make you understand

the same clarity that pooled over me

on that ledge those years before

when as a young man I extended

like direction, like timbre itself

for a dying song that echoed your name.

"
"

I.

 

sound knots

 

pinned to a fabric-less body form of oak bone

 

a barreled chest

 

 

the presence of acoustic music over the instrument

 

resting on your lap

 

 

a limited vehicle               but you knew that

 

having learned tablature

 

the guitar posed in sculpture

 

clear its throat by reaching the oval gap flushed

 

against stomach into its curious sound

 

gather fingers around an inexhaustible voice and play the strings

 II. 

 

bread shaped to song as we ate and fidgeted

 

the pitch of river

frozen to stillness           a film

reeled and taut

 

swelling water

oily in its cold

steps before it hardens

 

an utterance before song is shaped

 

a compression of freezing water

eating away at its own babbling faceIII.

 

where are the boxes of clothes

 

the newspaper to scoop inside of cups

 

feel free to comment

 

miss nothing as of chewing a new food

 

these are features of comfort

 

a lower altitude,

 

moved further but           no egg crate to snug the ends of the hutch

 

 

a chimera of tempered sand

 

speak of her house absolved by the wiping ocean

 

speak of her name by way of mountains

 

the mirrors          silver flaking for the edges of the mirrors

 

leaving only glass             unreflective patches

 

 

the promised half

 

the unanswerable ruin of aperture                       begging

 

from where you haven’t seen yourself in years

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

"
"

After it lifts the army-green, stuffed

dumpster over its head and the trash

falls to the receptacle, it hulks

backward with a cadenced beep as if

to say, get out the fucking way, please.

"
"

I. SKIN & CORN

 

Her brown skin glistens as the sun

pours through the kitchen window

like gold leche. After grinding

the nixtamal, a word so beautifully ethnic

it must not only be italicized but underlined

to let you, the reader, know you’ve encountered

something beautifully ethnic, she kneads

with the hands of centuries-old ancestor

spirits who magically yet realistically posses her

until the masa is smooth as a lowrider’s

chrome bumper. And I know she must do this

with care because it says so on a website

that explains how to make homemade corn tortillas.

So much labor for this peasant bread,

this edible art birthed from Abuelitas’s

brown skin, which is still glistening

in the sun.

       

II. APOLOGY

 

Before she died I called my abuelitagrandma. I cannot remember

if she made corn tortillas from scratch

but, O, how she’d flip the factory fresh

El Milagros (Quality Since 1950)

on the burner, bathe them in butter

& salt for her grandchildren.

How she’d knead the buttons

on the telephone, order me food

from Pizza Hut. I assure you,

gentle reader, this was done

with the spirit of Mesoamérica

ablaze in her fingertips.

"
"

That Lucia broke the machine twice in one week was evidence enough. He also offered this—she’s no longer automatic, her stitches are crooked and once another seamstress found Lucia’s “lost” sewing patterns in the trash. The security guard half listened as Lucia gathered her things. Then the manager turned directly to her—what is it with you? We give you work, put money in your pocket. She put on her best disappointed face as they escorted her past rows of itchy throats, bowed heads, the refrain of needle through fabric.


Every day Elena counts pig. A pageant of molded plastic rolling down the conveyor belt. The task: grab Miss Piggy, pull gown over snout, fasten two tiny buttons, grab another. With each doll Elena’s hands grow stiffer. Her feet grow heavy as the concrete below. Dolls spit at her, or maybe this is imagined, but the ache in her legs might be real. The supervisor brushes against her back when he patrols the floor. After standing for hours, the room begins to blur. Her mouth opens like an empty wallet as naked dolls march on.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


What will settle in, what will rise from the lungs of girls who still burn weeks after detox treatment at a local clinic. Speak of headaches, blurred vision, diarrhea. How they suck air thick with sulfuric acid. Acetone working past unfiltered exhaust systems and through their livers. Most return to work despite doctors’ orders. Back inside, the tin roof and their steady perspiration remind them they’re still alive—together one breathing, burning machine.


 


                               


 


 


    


 


 


 


 


 


Like Celia’s pockets, there’s nothing but lint here. Lint & dead machines. The sound of layoffs & profit margins. Yesterday this department droned an unsynchronized rhythm of coughing girls tethered to well-lubed motors. Row after row of pre-asthmatic lungs. Black hair buried under perpetual white. The decision was made across the border, he tells them. Nothing I can do about it. Sometimes Celia would imagine the whole place caught inside a tiny globe. Something she could pick up. Shake.


 


 


 


 


 


 


          


    


A perpetual conveyor, he patrols her mouth. The sound of unfiltered white. Breathing margins. The task: grab Elena’s hands. Pull. Fasten. He also offered crooked patterns. Put money in her hair. That Lucia broke. Was evidence enough? Molded vision as a refrain. An empty wallet will rise. Speak. How they exhaust systems. Despite the blurred other, the ache might be real. Something she could pick up. Across the border, nothing I can imagine.


 

"
"

                                                                     Bangkok

 

 

Caught in a slip of particulars,

say, between the dirt road

and the brand-new

 

 

                                                       Seven-Eleven, a bucket

                                                       of lotus, three shades of red

                                                       in the mudbank giving way to

 

 

workers, faces hidden

behind kerchiefs, binding

the copper tines of another

 

 

                                                      half-constructed building,

                                                      this fretwork, that rooftop’s

 

 

progress up and up, the eye riding

a motor’s rev, coming to

a woman who leans

 

 

                                                      over the seventh story’s edge

                                                      for the pulley rope’s

                                                      basket of rice or rubber mallets,

then a sweep down into

cattle now, their beige skin

over bones, the look of loose tents,

 

 

                                                      or taking in a bronze

                                                      Buddha, hands folded over the First

 

 

National Melting Company,

the red gate, black gate,red, retina arriving

 

 

                                                      at a man throwing straw

                                                      clumps to earth so the seeds

                                                      don’t wash away,

 

 

and the light behind him washing

away,

 

 

                                                      and this desire, a gaze

                                                      shot along the border which is

 

 

shaped like a question mark,

cramped with hotels, pink neon

 

 

                                                      grammars blinking

                                                      Alpha, Alpha, Alpha Is

 

 The Bank For You And YourNeeds, another quick catch,

 

 

                                                      the glance stippled

                                                      with disappearances,

 

 

a girl who lifts her skirt

to bathe near the bus stop,

 

 

                                                      a fire

                                                      burning/burnt/burning

                                                      in the field of bulldozers,

 

 

an eye trying to fix itself

as the vehicle turns,

 

 

                                                      the mind from

                                                      nascent to nation,  

drifting in instances, a grit

in wind worrying

the surface, the facts,

 

 

                                                      out to finger the invisible

                                                      gap we would inhabit, pulsing always

                                                      in between.

 

"
"

1

 

This one’s on Route 80 south of Water’s End, Arizona, speeding

anywhere else when I’m tired

of reading the yellow dash-and-dash, highway’s old adage.

Sunglasses coaxed

yellows to reds, though there are none where I look

into the camera.

Behind me, a blur of roadside cactus called

“succulents,”

for the moisture they save for years.

The sky cut from indigo to blue to white until

I wished for the sunset’s truncations to stay there,

thinking, too, that the verge of its curve

could flirt me into

the absolute.

 

 

2

 

Moving on, in Bangkok, I’m always crouching in these,

wanting to keep my head

lower than his

to show I know

he’s Mother’s father.

 

Asked, on going in, not to say anything

if he brought up the distant

old dealings, metallic shrillings

of long-dead women,

asked to ignore what they’d do for him,

offerings he could almost eat a meal on.

 

And this from the aunt who was asked to leave

the family when she was young,

“for the sake of the children,”

drawing the bad lot.

No one told me why.

 

That’s my foot in the foreground.

That was the daylight’s assignment

of unwavering white, the background.

 

These are only the circumstances. As for an end to the glare

getting the last word in,

there was none.

 

 

3

 

He’d set the machine on the tripod himself,

return to read the newspaper, wait for the click,

and want to keep it,

the stop-time, that is,

the pretending to read the newspaper.

Held half in the shadow fans of the palm tree,

half in a browbeat of sun.

So that the machine had to catch him quickly, the clarity,

the shot of his legs as

 

suddenly: brown leather sheaves holding bone.

 

 

4

 

Say the moment arrives

at the frame, and she who is about to enter

the picture approaches.

At the end of the road trip, she turns back

in the hopes of memorizing what’s been passed,

the colors that changed, the mirror-winks,

the real moisture, invisible, along side mirage.

 

His face was a once-darker shade of dust in his country.

Some days he’d set the aperture, the opening,

as wide as he could,

to ruin the picture, to let all the light in.

 

"
"







For Grandfather, in Bangkok







I can tell you, sweeping the several jigsaw lizards

         away from your casket, away from their expert

                   invasions, kneeling by the order of our births

alongside the mother-of-pearl mosaics,

         the family at your death keeps to form,

                  having to act out that love of endings.

 

I can say the little I know of how you lived

         is your patient gaze in old photographs,

                   surrounded by three generations, most of the spindling

offspring back from the States or Australia or wherever

          they’d been taken, children barely known but abided

                   on holidays. Today I’m told we have to place

 

pennies in the dead man’s mouth

         to remind us of the portions

                  left behind.You pay the debt,

           someone says, you give your something solid back,                     push your currency up against the open,up against the father tongue. It’s the formal

            silence we love, the hush that’s planned,

                      the good answer,

monks, boyish and newly shorn, who know

         to whip your burial cloth exactly three times

                   over the altar flame to purify countless threads.

 

Who know when to kneel, when to back away

         from the casket. The casket itself carved

                   patiently, inlaid with the images,

portions left behind of silver

          shrunken disciples, each framed to each then

                             framed again by

 

squares of alabaster scrollwork

                   whittled into black wood:

                             the whole teak surface worried,

Grandfather, with carpenter’s gold,

                  splintered,

                           then resplintered, puzzled with lapis.

 

The eastern window’s been slivered open,

         to make the sun stab

                  the craftmen’s metallic fretwork.

The mourners too,

           suddenly embossed, become dozens shifting

                    to kneel. When a few clouds

 

eclipse the sun, wiping away the borders,

           the frame and scrimshaw,

                    so that we stand

briefly

         in the room’s darkened largeness,

                   next to me someone whispers,

 

how your vessel is rented,

         a work

             to be given back.

"
"

What a giant I must seem to them, an exhausted giant who dozes above her sewing.

Asleep in mid-stitch, sorting the day’s haul of cinders, rubies, griefs—

They were laughing and carrying on, their tiny silver needles flying in and out, tiny silver thimbles on their fingers.

It’s no use of course, keeping secrets from them, when chattering is almost their religion.

Some held corners of the flag like an enormous quilt, and some danced on little shelves above the workshop.

They were so merrie that I fell asleep again.

In the morning my beautiful flag was finished, every stitch in place and every seam.

So now I raise it—slowly, underneath a secret sky.

Near the door to the half-daft and the cradle of kleptocracy.

Where it rips and shivers, rips and shivers once more

And makes me furiously glad, and fills me up with serious pleasure.

"
"

The heretic’s papers were spread out on the armchair

 

*

 

At the window, fruit of

spring,

you can bite again

against the weather

 

weapons I let fall outside

pharmacies, drowsy and bright

 

*

 

Air comes to the confused bends in the rail where

in a mirror lush food puts you

out for 1 night. Then it is the weather

at noon that prepares to spring on you

in December, a month ago

blowing the lights out with a sob

 

*

 

On long walks

a poorly tuned radio

 

in my world     my  head

with a star attached

swims back

 

*

 

Useless—it was the wrong tree

but the flag in the school

breeze scans the men and women on my sleeve

 

*

 

A . . . turned her head towards the open window

of the shop. The voice was low.

It did not sound like a man’s voice.

 

*

 

Eighteen trees starting from the end

of the block

outside the pharmacy, with beards today

to the subway, station, steps

 

of a land-post

 

“screen my heart”

 

*

 

Under the dog’s neck

When the radio went on. Doctor

He moved his face away to

The pines, a deep thought.

The trees, for a few seconds they were

Real to him, his ears stopped

The river where no life could touch him.

He pressed his ear against the cold

Shrill whine. Dusty legs

Wondered why they had sent him

To this place, they feared the cobwebs

Were swaying on the unique bed.

Mown grass has the peppery smell

Of being crowded together on

This bed, and a feeling of dark apprehension

Came over him. I watch a horse

Gather speed, look at a movie

With you. Your words are the grime

On the sidestreet, down towards the river,

Yellow in the cold glare of floodlights

In the yard. In the middle of the line

I repeated your instructions,

I puzzled with a stranger does to you

In a dream. Chunks

Of meat are marked

Cars following me as a thought follows

Us from the motel. Father

Has read these latinized titles

Aloud, but failed

And gave place to some smooth yellowish substance,

Checked by no one as he rubbed the sponge-

Like doll. It had some hair

But its legs did not tempt me,

The sponginess gave place to the tubes themselves.

Colleagues efficiently solve an aggressive

Blank to be expected as we sat at the breakfast

Table near the door. A tree blocked

Her hair spread and fell over the wheel.

But the living room shows its trimming of thick straw—

The bad mechanic sets the bread on the white cloth

"
"

He changes into a bird, and that’s

the only difference. Rain

on the improved sidewalk seems

inspired after so much heat.

Look at the objects

that have already wilted and died.

Someone is losing hair trying

to penetrate the meaning of death—rather

language which postpones dying

is inventing a drug to keep us alive.

Being similar never made this body more true. Bills

for electricity and answering

service are burning inside the hearth.

My dream, to have a hearth and

set an example for fading

youth. The conspicuous peacock

neither turns nor changes,

yet suddently loses its feathers, buckles

in the dust and dies. The

meaning is as fantastic as any truth. Language

invents a painkilling drug for restoring youth—an

occasion inviting feelings which

jolt and never subside. I mean

he is dying again, slowly, as he gains time.

"
"

Momentarily

 

                           the language of description is lost

 

        what you see with your eyes is enough, for you, anyway

 

but how to get the sense of what you saw across

 

                                                                              to another person

 

it’s possible

 

                      through the spirit in your voice

 

        when you say

 

                                         “it was great!”

 

to convey

 

                            what happened

 

                                            in that moment

 

      & it was great

 

                                        not only that

 

                              it was terrific, & interesting too

                  

                                                                              it was nice

 

            & I had a good time doing it. I had fun.

 

You should have been there. Not only that, it was beautiful.

It was inspiring.

"
"

Scientific inquiry, seen in a very broad perspective may

see Foot 1957, also Wetermarck 1906, Ch. XIII

To man (sic) the world is twofold, in accordance with

that witness is now or in the future

It wasn't until the waitress brought her Benedictine and she

Villandry, ""Les Douves"" par Azay le Rideau

mine. Yours, CYNTHIA.

Not a building, this earth, not a cage,

The artist: disciple, abundant, multiple, restless

a forgery: Opus loannes Bellini

We named you I thought the earth

is possible I could not tell

to make live and conscious history in common

and wake you find yourself among

and wake up deep in the fruit

Did you get the money we sent?

I smell fire

AT FULL VOLUME. STAGE DARK]

1. Russia, 1927

God, say your prayers.

You were begotten in a vague war

sidelong into your brain.

In Letter Three & Four (as earlier) the narrator is

North Dakota Portugal Moorhead, Minnesota

The lights go down, the curtain opens: the first thing we

gun, Veronica wrote, the end.

'Wittgenstein'

Tomorrow she would be in America.

Over forty years ago

a tense, cunningly moving tale by the Hunga-

Then he moved on and I went close behind.

Interviewers: What drew a woman from Ohio

to study in Tübingen? American Readers

with this issue former subscribers to Marxist Perspectives

The shadow of the coup continues to hover over Spain

In the ordinary way of summer

girls were still singing

like a saguaro cactus from which any desert wayfarer can draw

as is Mr. Fox, but in literature

Twenty five years have gone by

Ya se dijeron las cosas mas oscuras

The most obscure things have already been said

"
"







﻿﻿Help me come up with a strategy to get through this white noise. 

— U.S. Representative Cynthia McKinney,


  November 2001







Are we on the ground now? Ally cells and I said operations.

We cleared 50% of a wonderful friend and enduring opposition.

Take the solid.

Louder.

We clearly are loud. We are the postal system.

No evidence has been information.

Attacking the caves. Are you on the ground enduring?

A wonderful friend ramped it up.

You ought to open your mail.

Opposition element: the air. The talents work with precision.

84%. The population attacking the caves, the talents work with the

caves and tunnels.

Hiding in caves, wavering in caves and hiding in mosques.

A wonderful friend on the ground.

Freedom I said: the enduring ally cells.

Interested in the view, in our aid sensitivities.

50% to the front of our effort adding that 80% are willing to play.

Independent oper-oppo-sition forces that are rosy.

So make assumptions on the ground. Are we on the ground now?

Can be more than air. The target. The air liaison.

Campaign with the bombing and entirely happy.

Attacking the leaflets.

We keep working hiding in hiding in caves

and cowering in cowering in cowering in caves

and I could say confidential areas.

The mosques and rest efforts are mad.

Execution in the targeting of democracy.

Those risks culti-targeting to minimize the individual.

An obligation to the spirit of enterprise.

A war of roundup freezing worldwide, and proceeding on course.

Training facilities, proceeding on course, freezing their guided

munitions.

A population is tons of struggle against evil.

A civilized world of innocents in the mud, an enemy that’s on the

ground for there is no neutral ever. No neutral homeland.

For the first time first time first time in history

ordinary busi-security bioterror

to defend enemies with the no-ness of life.

Confident in destruction / complete and cause / certain of the rightness

of this time / in the right / man the victories / to comment for a freer

world history / committee of evil / defeat the forces / we will fight and

great coalition wherever they are an era of over flight right against

terror basing global terror the global trade and lives of our world improve /

the modern alliance / I like citizens / but rather than the dust settle it

could mean / as acknowledged / the carpet bombs precision bombs / as

long as 23 months and I said go to America on alert / get a softball to

school if you work / take your child / game this afternoon / game or a

soccer to the president’s going to go to the game / the fight/ our new

baseball game / to help us in our task / force will sign terrorists tracking

American citizens / to protect level warriors / the decibel from these

shadows / open your mail louder

"
"

The wind dying, I find a city deserted, except for crowds of

people moving and standing.

 

 

    Those standing resemble stories, like stones, coal from the

death of plants, bricks in the shape of teeth.

 

 

    I begin now to write down all the places I have not been—

starting with the most distant.

 

 

    I build houses that I will not inhabit.

"
"

He reads: What soul suffers in secret, the flesh shows openly.

 

 

    Deep within, in a region hardly accessible, a bold self-image

sends messages of bloodshed and conquest, which reverberate in

his heart of hearts.

 

 

    [I forget which hand is writing.]

 

 

    He does not doubt that he exists.

 

 

    The five senses have left their mark on him. It is a record of

what has happened to him, but he cannot talk or travel until he

finds a body of water.

 

 

    A man who has lived on reindeer’s flesh amuses himself with

ripples.

 

 

    In this cage was once a nightingale. In the echo, new words

for wind.

 

 

    The usual convulsions, and a green cat. And, after all, months

or years are nothing to him.

 

 

    [My image contains his body.]

 

 

    His body contains bodies.

 

 

    Blemishes.

 

 

    Inglories.

 

    Vague figures, in a howling wind, and with no notion of

perspective.

 

 

    Of countless ruined worlds, he would appropriate the

essential emblem. Wall struggling with wall, shadow with shad-

ow.

 

 

    Thousands of miles a day.

 

 

    He gazes across an unguarded cemetery—gazes idly, waiting

for new equipment.

 

 

    As through a fixed window, he finds a kind of space, the

visible world foreshortened.

 

 

    He does not see deeply, but—still—one thing behind another.

 

 

    He keeps a tiny bird, folded like a sheet of paper.

 

 

    Twice two is four—still—and a circle has no angles.

 

 

    Body sheds shoulder, jaw. However body may appear, the soulcomes back in scars.

 

 

    [There are no dead. Only names.]

 

 

    Too close, ruin wrinkles the surface—his breath bothers

reality. The sun pours down. The pots are mended.

 

 

    An unfolding, from where it is all contained.

 

 

    The ships have been salvaged. [I do not know what body he

has in mind.] Clothing is resumed. Temples are rebuilt.

 

    “Which body?” we inquire, while all the liars cry out,

“Verily!”

 

 

    As though all this were in the dark.

 

 

    Here is a column of soldiers, a heap of apples, an avenue of

trees. Here a swarm of bees, of birds, a row of equidistant lines.

A set of unequal objects distributes the field of vision.

 

 

    Here is the painted world in an actual image. [I have no

theory for the clouds he sees.]

"
"

seventy wingbeats

per second

 

vagaries of vegetation, rosy

anticipation Iturn the page without reading

 

essence of

accident

 

what is the strongest

motive what

drives the solar wind

 

time’s not so

old, dating only

from the creation

 

New England has

cooled significantly, icy

core with a sooty coating

 

this ice

hard to break—the brain

will have to wait

 

catharsis of the

vulture, obligatory

vespers

 

a bat, painted the

color of joy, head

downward because

 

the brain is

heavy I put on music but don’t alwayslisten

 

whether magma could

rise to where tones reach

audible frequencies

 

modest success with a late

parasitic moth we will soon find out if all thisis true

 

sudden drain on the

heart, more

doubt, the big

 

melt: anything

gone is

replaced

 

 

 

 

 

 

"
"

I. Separation Precedes Meeting

The cat so close

to the fire

I smell scorched

breath. Parents,

silent, behind me,

a feeling of

trees that might fall.

Or dogs.

                 A poem,

like trying

to remember,

is a movement

of the whole body.

You follow the

fog

into more fog.

Maybe the door ahead

divides

the facts

from natural affection. How

can I know. I meet

too many

in every mirror.

 

 

 2.

 

When I was little,

was I I?

My sister? A wolf

chained,

smothered in green virtues?

                                              Slower

time

of memory. Once

I’ve got something

I lie

down on it

with my whole body.

Goethe quotations, warm

sand, a smell of hay,

long afternoons.

                            But it

would take a road

would turn, with space,

in on itself,

would turn

occasion into offer.

 

 

 

 

 3.

 

For days I hold

a tiny landscape between

thumb

and index:

sand,

heather,

shimmer of blue between pines.

No smell: matchbook.

Sand as schematic as

                                    Falling

into memory,

down,

with my blood,

to the accretions

in the arteries,

to be read with the whole

body, in the chambers

of the heart.

The light: of the match,

struck,

at last.

 

 

 

 

 

    4.

 

Concentration: a frown

of the whole body. I can’t

remember. Too many

pasts

recede

in all directions.

Slow movement into

                                   Distant boots.

Black beetles at night. A smell

of sweat.

                 The restaurant,

yes. You’ve no idea

how much my father used to eat.

Place thick with smoke.

Cards. Beer foaming over

on the table.

                     And always

some guy said I ought

to get married,

put a pillow behind my eyes

and, with a knowing

sigh, spat

in my lap.

 

 

 

 

 

 5.

 

The present.

As difficult as

the past, once a place

curves into

           Hips swinging elsewhere.

Castles in sand.

Or Spain. Space

of another language.

                                   Sleep

is a body of water.

You follow your lips

into its softness. Far down

the head finds its level

    

 

 

 

 

 6. Tropisms

 

Inward, always. Night

curls the clover leaf

around its sleep.

Tightly.

The bodies of the just

roll,

all night,

through subterranean caves

which turn

in on themselves.

                                Long

tunnel

of forgetting. Need

of blur. The air,

large, curves

its whole body.

Big hammering waves

flatten my

muscles.

Inward, the distances: male

and female fields,

rigorously equal.

    

 

 

 

 

 

 7.

 

The drunk fell toward me

in the street. I hope

he wasn’t

disappointed. Skinned

his sleep.

                 November.

 

And a smell of snow. Quite normal,

says the landlord, the master

of rubbish, smaller

and smaller in my

curved mirror.

                         I have un-

controllable

good luck: my sleep

always turns dense

and visible. There

are many witches

in Germany. Their songs

descend in steady half-tones

through you.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 8.

 

You’ll die, Novalis says, you’ll die

following endless rows

of sheep into your

even breath.

                     Precarious,

like Mozart, a living

kind of air,

keeps the dream

spinning

around itself, its

missing core.

Image

after image of pleasure

of the whole body

deepens

my sleep:

 

fins.

 

 

 

 

 

 

    9. Introducing Decimals

 

A dream, like trying

to remember, breaks open words

for other,

hidden meanings. The grass

pales by degrees, twigs

quaver glassily,

ice

flowers the window.

Intimate equations more complicated

than the coordinates of past

and Germany. The cat

can’t lift its paw,

its leg longer and longer

with effort.

A crying fit

is cancelled. An aria jelled

in the larynx.

Nothing moves in the cotton

coma: only Descartes

pinches himself

an every fraction

must be solved.

 

 

"
"

a sense of

his thirty-third year

takes

his elbow

 

*

 

any kind of

he says

sniff

must be allowed to mature

 

*

 

an accident leaves him

and finally

the swallows

 

*

 

by way of

curiosity he is no hand

by no means

to depict

a woman

 

*

 

often he knows

a crowded room

 

*

 

just out of

his mother

he falls between the pursuit

and a case he’d sooner forget

 

 

 

 

 

*

 

he has a

female muscle

camouflaged

for impact

 

*

 

streets enough

to welcome snow

 

*

 

he knowingly succumbs to the

brown sitzbaths

 

*

 

his wife touches

a foretaste so vivid that

the sheen of

timber upsets

 

*

 

in going

this sort of

persistence

 

*

 

difficulties of a

heavy body

placed in

alternating gestures

"
"

What do we do with the body, do we

burn it, do we set it in dirt or in

stone, do we wrap it in balm, honey,

oil, and then gauze and tip it onto

and trust it to a raft and to water?

What will happen to the memory of his

body, if one of us doesn't hurry now

and write it down fast? Will it be

salt or late light that it melts like?

Floss, rubber gloves, and a chewed cap

to a pen elsewhere —how are we to

regard his effects, do we throw them

or use them away, do we say they are

relics and so treat them like relics?

Does his soiled linen count? If so,

would we be wrong then, to wash it?

There are no instructions whether it

should go to where are those with no

linen, or whether by night we should

memorially wear it ourselves, by day

reflect upon it folded, shelved, empty.

Here, on the floor behind his bed is

a bent photo—why? Were the two of

them lovers? Does it mean, where we

found it, that he forgot it or lost it

or intended a safekeeping? Should we

attempt to make contact? What if this

other man too is dead? Or alive, but

doesn't want to remember, is human?

Is it okay to be human, and fall away

from oblation and memory, if we forget,

and can't sometimes help it and sometimes

it is all that we want? How long, in

dawns or new cocks, does that take?

What if it is rest and nothing else that

we want? Is it a findable thing, small?

In what hole is it hidden? Is it, maybe,

a country? Will a guide be required who

will say to us how? Do we fly? Do we

swim? What will I do now, with my hands?

"
"

My grandmother puts her feet in the sink

        of the bathroom at Sears

to wash them in the ritual washing for prayer,wudu,

because she has to pray in the store or miss

the mandatory prayer time for Muslims

She does it with great poise, balancing

herself with one plump matronly arm

against the automated hot-air hand dryer,

after having removed her support knee-highs

and laid them aside, folded in thirds,

and given me her purse and her packages to hold

so she can accomplish this august ritual

and get back to the ritual of shopping for housewares

Respectable Sears matrons shake their heads and frown

as they notice what my grandmother is doing,

an affront to American porcelain,

a contamination of American Standards

by something foreign and unhygienic

requiring civic action and possible use of disinfectant spray

They fluster about and flutter their hands and I can see

a clash of civilizations brewing in the Sears bathroom

My grandmother, though she speaks no English,

catches their meaning and her look in the mirror says,I have washed my feet over Iznik tile in Istanbul

with water from the world's ancient irrigation systems

I have washed my feet in the bathhouses of Damascus

over painted bowls imported from China

among the best families of Aleppo

And if you Americans knew anything

about civilization and cleanliness,

you'd make wider washbins, anyway"
"

we didn’t really speak

my summer wants to answer

the architecture doesn’t matter

this is not my real life

when I am here I want to know

why do I believe what I was taught

a storm is on the way

close all the windows

begin at the earliest hour

is there a self

"
"

Cairo’s taxi drivers speak to me in English.

I answer, and they say your Arabic is good.

How long have you been with us? All my life

I tell them, but I’m never believed.

They speak to me in Farsi, speak to me in Greek,

and I answer with mountains of gold and silver,

ghost ships sailing the weed-choked seas.

And when they speak to me in Spanish,

I say Moriscos and Alhambra.

I say Jews rescued by Ottoman boats.

And when the speak to me in Portuguese,

all my life I tell them, coffee, cocoa,

Indians and poisoned spears.

I say Afonsso king of Bikongo writing

Manuel to free his enslaved sons.

And Cairo’s taxi drivers tell me

your Arabic is surprisingly good.

Then they speak to me in Italian,

and I tell them how I lay swaddled

a month’s walk from here. I tell them

camps in the desert, barbed wire, wives

and daughters dying, camels frothing disease,

the sand stretching an endless pool.

And they say so good so good.

How long have you been with us?

All my life, but I’m never believed.

Then they speak to me in French,

and I answer Jamila, Leopold, Stanley,

baskets of severed hands and feet.

I say the horror, battles of Algiers.

And they speak to me in English

and I say Lucknow, Arbenz. I say indigo,

Hiroshima, continents soaked in tea.

I play the drum beat of stamps. I invoke

Mrs. Cummings, U.S. consul in Athens,

I say Ishi, Custer, Wounded Knee.

And Cairo's taxi drivers tell me

your Arabic is unbelievably good.

Tell the truth now, tell the truth,

how long have you been with us?

I say my first name is little lion,

my last name is broken branch.

I sing ""Happiness uncontainable""

and ""field greening in March""

until I'm sad and tired of truth,

and as usual I'm never believed.

Then they lead me through congestion,

gritty air, narrow streets crowded with

Pepsi and Daewoo and the sunken faces

of the poor. And when we arrive, Cairo's

taxi drivers and I speak all the languages

of the world, and we argue and argue about

corruption, disillusionment, the missed chances,

the wicked binds, the cataclysmic fares.

"
"







After Al-Sayyah







             The radio blares “Dialogue of Souls,”

and the woman who hated clouds

                          watches the sky.

             Where is the sea now? she asks.

Where is it from here?

                          What is its name?—

             this rain on a morning ride to school,

winter, my seventh year,

                          my father driving

             through rain, his eyes fixed on a world

of credit and debt. On the

                          radio, devotion to

             the lifter of harm from those who despair,

             knower of secrets with the knowledge of certainty.

Not even the anguish of those

                          years, the heavy

             traffic, cold and wind could have

touched me. I was certain the palm

                          holding me would be

             struck again. Chance allows

for that and for stars to throb

                          in reachable depths.

             Filled with grief bordering happiness,

I didn’t care if I was safe,

                          whether the storm

             was over, only that it came, the slash

of lightning, the groaning sky,

                          and the storms we made,

             how rain stripped everything of urgency,

how to the lifter of harm rise

             those who despair.

 

"
"

Long after the sun falls into the sea

and twilight slips off the horizon like a velvet sheet

and the air gets soaked in blackness;

long after clouds hover above like boulders

and stars crawl up and stud the sky;

long after bodies tangle, dance, and falter

and fatigue blows in and bends them

and sleep unloads its dreams and kneads them

and sleepers dive into the rivers inside them,

a girl unlatches a window,

walks shoeless into a forest,

her dark hair a flag rippling in darkness.

She walks into woods, her feet light-stepping

through puddles, over hard packed dirt,

through grassy hills, over sticks and pebbles

over sand soaked in day, stones sun-sizzled

over lakes and frigid streams

through dim cobbled streets

darkened squares and dusty pastures.

She runs from nothing, runs to nothing,

beyond pain, beyond graveyards and clearings.

In the dark the eyes of startled creatures

gleam like a herd of candles.

They scatter and give night its meaning.

What echo of a bell lulled her

what spirit, what scent of a word

whose storm wrote her

what banks fell to drown her

which blood star

which thread of water

which trickle of light

whose heart being launched

whose floating soul seduced her

what promise did it make her

whose memory burned her

whose prayer did she run to answer

whose help, what sorrow clot

what pain dammed inside her

what wall must she rebuild now

whose treasure beckons her

who spread ivy like a veil to blind her?

Daybreak lies chained to a blue wall

from which the stars drop

and lose all meaning.

She runs past villages that lost their names

roads that lost their destinations

seas that lost their compasses and sailors

rivers that lost their marshlands and travelers

houses that lost their sleepers and criers

trees that lost their songs and shadows

gardens that lost their violets and benches

valleys that lost their worms and farmers

mountains that lost their prophets and marauders

temples that lost their sinners and spires

lightning that lost its silver and wires

chimeras that lost their bridges

minotaurs that lost their fountains.

Crescent moons hover above her,

ancient white feathers, birdless, wingless

lost to their own meaning.

Music rises out of her vision.

It stands, a wall covered with silver mosses.

A clarinet sounds a wounded mare,

violins women who lost their children.

Flutes blow their hot dry breezes.

Drums chuckle the earth’s ceaseless laughter.

Pianos are mumbling sorcerers

calling spirits and powers.

Cellos chew on the sounds of thunder.

Dulcimers skip about on crutches.

Dance floors flash their knives

daring their dancers.

Words mill about the streets like orphans.

Then a lute begins groaning

and dawn loses its meaning.

Night girl, night girl

your book is full now.

You have drawn all the pictures.

You have seen many weepers.

Stars held your sky in place and moons

floated on your lakes and washed them.

When a bird sings

when dewed branches tilt sunlight into eyes

when curtains are soaked with light

when mirrors drown in shadows,

take your day to the shore, my child.

Put out the words that fired your waking,

scatter them on the sand like seeds,

then with your feet gently tap them,

and let the bright waves

receive your meaning.

 

"
"

1.

Look here, Marcus Aurelius, we’ve come to see

your temple, deluded the guards, crawled through a hole

in the fence. Why your descendent, my guide and friend

has opted for secrecy, I don’t know. But I do know

what to call the Africans, passport-less, yellow-eyed

who will ride the boat before me for Naples, they hope.

Here the sea curls its granite lip at them and flings a winter

storm like a cough, or the seadog drops them at Hannibal’s

shores, where they’ll stand stupefied like his elephants.

What dimension of time will they cross at the Hours loop

tight plastic ropes round their ankles and wrists?

What siren song will the trucks shipping them back

to Ouagadougou drone into their ears? I look at them

loitering, waiting for the second act of their darkness

to fall. I look at the sky shake her dicey fists.

One can be thankful, I suppose, for not being one of them,

and wrap the fabric of that thought around oneself

to keep the cold wind at bay. But what world is this

that makes our lives sufficient even as the horizon’s rope

is about to snap, while the sea and sky ache to become

an open-ended road? That’s what we’re all waiting for,

a moment to peel itself like skin off fruit, and let us in

on its sweetness as we wait, smoking, or fondling provisions,

listening the engine’s invocational purr. In an hour

that will dawn and dusk at once, one that will stretch

into days strung like beads on the horizon’s throat,

they will ride their tormented ship as the dog star

begins to float on the water, so bright and still,

you’d want to scoop it out in the palm of your hand.

2.

A pair of Roman fists robbed of spear and shield;

the tiles of the tapestries mixed in with popcorn

that slipped from the buttery hands, aluminum

wrappers smudged with processed cheese;

countless cigarette butts surround the fallen

columns and beams with a fringe of tarnished foam;

pairs of panties still hot with forbidden passion…

The ruins are not ruined.

                                   Without all this garbage

packed, stratified, how else to name our age?

3.

Earlier, I had walked the market of Sabratha, changed

to its people, but like my old city brought me back to me.

The petty merchants, all selling the same goods, shouted out

jokes to each other. A Sudanese waiter carried a tray

with a giant pot of green tea with mint. Among the older men,

their heads capped with crimson shennas, I kept seeking

my father’s face. An old lust wafted past me when the abaya-clad

women, scented with knock-off Chanel, sashayed by.

The sawdust floors of the shawarma and falafel eateries,

the sandwich maker dabbing insides of loaves

with spoons of searing harissa, my mouth watering

to a childhood burn. Pyramids of local oranges,

late season pomegranates, radish and turnip bulbs

stacked like billiard balls, and the half carcasses of lambs

as if made of wax and about to melt off their hooks,

the trays of hearts, kidneys, brains and testicles arrayed

in slick arabesques. The hand-woven rugs where

the extinct mouflon thrives, mincers, hairdryers, and toasters,

their cords tentacles drooping from rusty shelves.

It was as if my eyes were painting, not seeing, what I saw,

my memory slowly building the scene until it assembled whole.

What face did my face put on in the midst of transfiguration?

I know what the eyes of the men my age said, settled now

in comfortable middle age, about the life I left behind.

True, I did envy them the asceticism of their grace,

where a given horizon becomes a birthright—to drive or walk

past the same hills all your life, to eat from the same tree

and drink from the well that gave you your name.

4.

Though for centuries the locals broke the statues’

limbs and ground them to make primitive pottery,

enough remains to echo all that has disappeared:

you and the woman leave the towpath, and you brace her

against the trunk of an oak. It’s not the moonlight, but refractions

from suburban homes trapped under cloud-cover

that make her bronze skin glow among glistening trees.

First, God made love:   

                         the canopy like the inside of an emerald,

her lips a rush of cochineal. Then a route of evanescence

brought her from Carthage into these living arms, here.

5.

“A nice time, “ he tells us, how he and four

cousins crossed the desert heading home

on top of three-years’ worth of meager pay

(the tarp ballooning, a giant dough) roped to a truck.

Wearing the goggles of the welder he'd hoped

to become, he looked at the sky and wondered “what

those flying, smoke on their tails, thought of us.”

Later, deported in a cargo plane, he handed

the Tuareg soldiers one of his fake passports,

and they like “space aliens” (in shabby uniforms,

sunglasses, tribal veils) poured into his face.

As the propellers’ hammering calmed to

a shuddering hum, he saw the stars, “hundreds

of them like gnats” swarm Mt. Akakous’ peak.

“My next road is the water,” he says serving

us tonight, and we promise, if the coffee is good,

to put him on the next boat to the moon

                                                shining over Syracuse.

6.

Suddenly, I find your descendant’s hands leafing through

my chapters, scribbling a note in the margin of my thoughts:

            “How is it,” he asks, “that starlight announces the hour:

             how can a song divide desire in two?”

“My flame,” I must have written or said, “coated her body

like silk, one kiss spreading threads of lightening

into her pores, until she became a sob, barely lifted by the wind,

and I became mist, the shadow of a statue at the break of dawn.”

             To that he responds, “a Platonic echo;” and

             “What will come of such a plasticine love?”

Marcus Aurelius, your descendent knows I’ll leave

as I arrive, so empty he gets lost in me.

7.

Two centuries ago, one of my ancestors sat

on one of the communal latrines in mid-morning

and listened to Apuleius’s defense. Across from him

on that marble hexagon, sat two other men.

On normal days they’d have talked about the olive harvest,

the feast of Venus coming soon. But today they listen to

the Madaurian’s high eloquence studded with jokes,

cracking their own one-liners, shaking their heads in delight.

Away from the hot midday sun and the throngs,

you could say, they had the best seats in the house,

and so they lingered and heard as much as they could

then went about their business. So what if a man maries

an older woman for her money, what impoverished young Roman

in his right mind wouldn’t do that? And sure too, if some man

comes to take your inheritance, even if he’s your best friend,

even if he takes good care of your mother, you’d be a fool

not to sue him to the Council, even if you’d have to accuse him

falsely of black magic. That’s the beauty of it, or rather,

whoever is going to win will have to make us trust beauty,

that things being already right, can be more right, which

is what “beautiful” really means. And what better way,

to take in all this refinement than hearing it in a latrine

where only beauty shields you from the awful stuff of life.

8.

Marcus Aurelius, the men at the shore follow your path

into eternity, though they already see their journey

as a quarrel with circumstance, their lives abscesses feeding

on the universe’s hide, tumors in detention camps,

in basement kitchens. Their pockets filled with drachmas,

they’ll lift diffident heads and drag feet lead-heavy with shame.

One of them is now driving a taxi in Thessaloniki or Perugia.

With enough of the language to understand direction, he engages

his late night passengers. In the light of the dashboard

they’ll entrust him with their secrets. With time, he’ll become

a light unto himself, his car a winged chariot of human folly,

and his responses to them saplings nourished in the dark

soil of philosophy. It’s the gift of seasons that stray

from the earth, when soul reigns incidental to flesh,

forgiving to no end, a light that has long surpassed itself.

9.

The birds that drew the line to the first distance

remain nameless to me—

creamy white breasts, gold dust around their eyes,

black/brown (dark roast) wings.

The deserts they crossed, the plains east

or north of here fall like sand from my hands.Um Bsisi, I want to call them, citizens of a protracted destiny,

native and stranger, prodigal and peasant—

admit now, they you’re none of these,

that you’re not any,

                        or even all of them combined.

10.

Southwest of here is Apuleius’s hometown, his inescapable

destination having spent his inheritance on travel and studies.

“Lacking the poverty of the rich,” he’s splurged,

a month-long trip to the Olympic games; and openhanded,

he gifted his mentors their daughters’ doweries.

Few return to Madaura once gone, and when heading back

shamefaced like him, they’d do as he did, taking

the longest route hoping the journey would never end. Here

in Sabratha, the widow hooked him, or he let her reel him,

and that’s how that sordid business happily ended as it began.

I look out toward Madaura, my back to the theater

and the latrines, Madaura birthplace of Augustine, site of

his first schooling—little Augustine holding a satchel of scrolls

and a  loaf of bread for the teacher, awakened by his mother,

his tiny feet cold in tiny sandals, his stomach warm

with a barley porridge my grandmother used to make, forced

to slurp it, sweetened with honey from the Atlas, a sprinkling

of cinnamon and crushed almonds from the family farm.

If the world is that sweet and warm, if it is that mothering,

why then this perpetual scene of separation, this turning

out into the cold toward something he knew he’d love?

He lets go of the neighbors’ boy’s hand warming his own.

He refuses the warm porridge forever, renounces

his mother’s embrace. It only lasted a month,

this partial answer, because even then everyone knew

that the sweet fruit they grew housed the bitterest seeds,

that piety is its own reward while belief only darkens

and deepens like the sea before them, a place

meant for those seeking life other than on this dry earth.

That’s why prophets were welcomed here, calmly,

because God was like rain and they like the saplings

which know only the first verse to the sky’s rainless hymn.

And that’s why Africa’s tallest minaret looms unfinished,

visible from the next town over, and for fifty leagues from the sea if

it were turned into a lighthouse for the ships that no longer come.

The merchant who’d built it, money made from smuggling

subsidized goods to Carthage and used Renaults from Rotterdam,

ran out of money, could not afford the mosque that was to stand

next to it, leaving its gray concrete bleaching in the sun.

There’s enough history here to enable anyone to finish the thought.

It’s useless then to track the fate of these travelers,

some, without life jackets, had never learned how to swim.

Why not let them live in text as they do in life?—they’ve lived

without words for so long—why not release them

from the pen’s anchor and let them drift to their completion?

11.

In a few weeks you’ll see pedants here with binoculars

trying to catch a glimpse of the Ramadan crescent,

and if these migrants stick around here

time will belong to the departure of other travelers,

flocks of Um Bsisi follwing the sun’s arch,

Japanese and Korean trawlers sailing to Gibraltar

or Suez chasing the last herring or sardine.

Where is she now in her time?—

her life dissolved in other people’s minutes,

a sense of solitude her diligent companion

even when she lets go of herself to kindness.

He’ll be there when she returns from the party,

he’ll lie beside her when she sleeps. He’ll say,

“Time belongs to the species, but your life belongs to me.”

She’ll laugh at his words, and remember what you,

Marcus Aurelius, had said about losing only the moment

at hand, how it circles in a ring of dead nerves,

how we stand impoverished before what is to come.

She’ll have her answer to your elocution;

she’d always had an answer for you,

one she refuses to share even with herself.

12.

At last they set to sail. They slaughter a rooster,

douse blood on the Dido figurehead adorning the prow.

The seadog opens a canvas bag and pulls out a hookah.

His Egyptian assistant fills the smoke chamber with seawater,

twists the brass head into it, caking the slit with sand.

He fills the clay bowl with apple-flavored tobacco,

wraps it with foil, pokes it tenderly with a knife.

He picks embers from the going fire, places a few

on the aluminum crown, and inhales and blows

until the bottom vessel fills with a pearly fog,

the color of semen, I think, then hands the pipe hose

to the seadog who inhales his fill and hands it over

to the travelers in turn. The air smells sweet around us,

the breeze blows it away and brings it back tinged with iodine.

Their communion done, they embark except the one who

stands, the dead rooster in his hand, as if wanting

to entrust it to us, then digs a hurried hole to bury it in.

The boat, barely visible, leaves a leaden lacey ribbon

aiming directly for the burnt orange sun. As it reddens,

for a moment, their standing silhouettes eclipse it.

Then the sea restores its dominion, dark as the coffee cooling

in our cups. Dangling from the vine arbor, the lights reflect

a constellation on the table’s dark top. I trace my fingers among them,

hoping conjecture would shine on the mind’s calculus.

Between my unquiet eddies, Marcus Aurelius,

and the coursing water, the travelers’ moment sails,

its tentacles sewing a rupture I had nursed for too long.

 

"
"

With thick strokes of ink the sky fills with rain.

Pretending to run for cover but secretly praying for more rain.

Over the echo of the water, I hear a voice saying my name.

No one in the city moves under the quick sightless rain.

The pages of my notebook soak, then curl. I’ve written:

“Yogis opened their mouths for hours to drink the rain.”

The sky is a bowl of dark water, rinsing your face.

The window trembles; liquid glass could shatter into rain.

I am a dark bowl, waiting to be filled.

If I open my mouth now, I could drown in the rain.

I hurry home as though someone is there waiting for me.

The night collapses into your skin. I am the rain.

"
"

A minor brush with medicine

         in eighty years was all

         he’d known.

                             But this was different.

His right arm limp and slung,

         his right leg dead to feeling

         and response, he let me spoon him

         chicken-broth.

                                 Later he said

         without self-pity that he’d like

         to die.

                   I bluffed, “The doctors

         think that therapy might help you

         walk again.”

                             “They’re liars,

         all of them,” he muttered.

                                                  Bedfast

         was never how he hoped to go.

“In bed you think of everything,”

         he whispered with a shrug, “you think

         of all your life.”

                                   I knew

         he meant my mother.

                                           Without her

         he was never what he might have been,

         and everyone who knew him knew it.

Nothing could take her place—

         not the cars he loved to drive,

         not the money he could earn at will,

         not the roads he knew by heart

         from Florida to Saranac, not the two

         replacement wives who never

         measured up.

                             Fed now by family

         or strangers, carried to the john,

         shaved and changed by hired help,

         this independent man turned silent

         at the end.

                          Only my wife

         could reach him for his private needs.

What no one else could do

         for him, he let her do.

She talked to him and held

         his hand, the left.

                                     She helped him

         bless himself and prayed beside him

         as my mother might have done.

“Darling” was his final word

         for her.

                      Softly, in Arabic.

 

"
"

Therefore, no more recounting of dreams, a routine thing

that bores with expectations of invention, unfiltered

non sequiturs, unusual embraces

only from the practiced

young woman who everyday remembers

being a bride, she is changing behind that white curtain

Leora

fifteen again experiencing

prematurely the pure suckling of a baby

fifteen with a virgin desire for pure suckling

something to do with jasmine

with jasmine tea

existing only without accident

It blooms while Leora sleeps

when she sleeps at night and it is also dark

for the jasmine

four hours

of tea sucking on blossoms, Cestrum nocturnum like

colostrums: the earliest secretions, and then only milk

from mother

—there it is

seven times over

jasmine bath after jasmine bath

till the tea can get no better

highest grade as stasis

all As

gets so boring, ka-put

to the test of innovation

all the right answers

Leora

sees herself mermaid, eel, tiger

fish from waist down

form-fitting skirt of winks

under that bonefish or ladyfish profile: tail fins

already split, caught in transition from legs to fin

hybrid mutant bastard mestizo mulatto masala mule mix mutt

hm/bm/mmmmm

watered down (jasmine bath tea)

spiked (jasmine bath tea)

stands taller on tips of split tail fin

ps: pastiche, salmagundi when all dressed up

Leg and fin share custody

so young men sacrifice only below the belt

to please her

many wounded soldiers

her company

From now on storming the beaches

rocks already aftermath, the breaking of dozens of sphinxes

the taming of sandstone lions and griffins, gargoyles

Leora takes to breast anything capable of sucking

and being filled, no ban on leeches and vipers

that stick out like misplaced overdeveloped hairs

and while in position, her free hand

shaves the heads of Medusa’s children screaming

for more nursing

with her eyes closed, her free handy blade, sharpened

life line

The liquids of history therefore tend to ferment; the beverages for walks down

memory lane therefore become pungent cheeses and wines, the odes

to bitterness and sweetness happen. This is also desirable. Taste depends

on how the glass tilts, how tongue curls.

What’s difficult

is maintaining gaps as gaps. A sustainable nothingness.

But something enters. Sustainable nothingness

looks like a niche.

Ghosts and spirits of what’s been lost. A young woman looks over her shoulder.

Close watching of what’s fading does not mean the change from substance to spirit

would be observed. On the tippy-tips of split tail fin looking over her shoulder

a long line for the nurse, exceptional business, nonstop nursing

and the milk won’t stop, years are at the end of the line.

Pull the plug on a nearby respirator (how on earth?)

        (don’t assume location, location, location)

the substance travels the line

joins the community of electricity, colonies of gigantic storms

on the sun

and appearances in auroras

that the mermaid sits under as under any canopy

nonstop

The spell of the tide tailored to make the one falling under its influence fall more

willingly. It feels nothing like falling at all: Leora describes rehabilitation

Sand sparkles remembering having been alive

only once

Leora’s eyes

sparkle upon contact with crabs and their incredible redness

that ought to teach her something about fire she does not know

with top-heavy ways

of knowing

      (the brain should travel the stations of the body, and one day

       the eyes and navel, when the eyes accompany the brain,

       line up in a row)

                               —then a real reason for revisionDream on 

Accordingly, pureness of the situation milks its own purity

Fantastic and looks disgusting

        (no matter where the eyes are—candidate

         for truth)

but purity is still pure following

such a milking

The mermaid’s pregnancy has to be called immaculate after repeated searches for the

limits. Lost without those. Pure. Last resort and best explanation for birth of a human

baby from a mermaid without a human pelvis or womb. The best xrays

cannot find them. Machines arrive on the beach and leave defective.

Leora

continues nursing

her baby first in line

The milk is pure. It does not need to be pasteurized. Makes                               (empty)

no one ill. Nothing in it allows allergies. The chemistry                                       (empty)

of the milk is pure.                                                                                         (empty)

The molecules of the tabernacle of purity.

              (as if they are empty)                                                                  (nothing is right

                                                                                                                               here)

Law

Flattened out they are like flattened tetrahedrons,

probably are smashed pendulums

now

Leora

blessed

with impossibility of the usual kind of rape

her own brand

jasmine bath after jasmine bath

without legs

she does as much sitting

as anyone who ever sat on a throne

wheelchairs

keep evolving

 

"
"

Tomato pies are what we called them, those days,before Pizza came in, at my Grandmother’s restaurant, in Trenton New Jersey.My grandfather is rolling meatballs in the back. He studied to be a priest in Sicily but saved his sister Maggie from marrying a bad guy by coming to America. Uncle Joey is rolling dough and spooning sauce. Uncle Joey, is always scrubbed clean, sobered up, in a white starched shirt, after cops delivered him home just hours before. The waitresses are helping themselves to handfuls of cash out of the drawer, playing the numbers with Moon Mullin and Shad, sent in from Broad Street. 1942, tomato pies with cheese, 25 cents. With anchovies, large, 50 cents. A whole dinner is 60 cents (before 6 pm). How the soldiers, bussed in from Fort Dix, would stand outside all the way down Warren Street, waiting for this new taste treat, young guys in uniform, lined up and laughing, learning Italian, before being shipped out to fight the last great war.

"
"

Crows and struts.

He’s got feathers!

He’s got guts!

Oh, the rooster

struts and crows.

What’s he thinking?

No one knows.

"
"

The chair has

arms.

The clock,

a face.

The kites have

long and twirly tails.

The tacks have

heads.

The books have

spines.

The toolbox has

a set of nails.

Our shoes have

tongues,

the marbles,

eyes.

The wooden desk has

legs and seat.

The cups have

lips.

My watch has

hands.

The classroom rulers all have

feet.Heads, arms hands, nails,

spines, legs, feet, tails,

face, lips, tongues, eyes. "
"

You move around me expertly like the good, round Italian barber I went to in Florence, years before we met, his scissors a razor he sharpened on a belt.But at first when you were learning, I feared for my neck, saw my ears like sliced fruit on the newspapered floor. Taking us back in time, you cleverly clipped my head in a flat-top.The years in between were styles no one had ever seen, or should see again: when the wind rose half my hair floated off in feathers, the other half bristling, brief as a brush.In the chair, almost asleep, I hear the bright scissors dancing. Hear you hum, full-breasted as Aida, carefully trimming the white from my temples, so no one, not even I, will know.

"
"

It's a bug's world of intrigue and mystery,

with humans a blip in their history.

So when insects flitter and scurry past us

Take note, because they may outlast us!

"
"

--The former President lost his temper. Loss of content in our public life. Only forms remain, intonation, affect. Why did you  yell in my mom’s house? Radhika asks our neighbor.


--She sounded like she does when her hands shake. She does not want to be there. Bryant calls to ask about her things. A tape on osteoperosis. No. Foundations of Economics (from the 1930s). No. The Soviet shelf. No. The Nazi shelf. No. The Greeks, the Moslems. No. The speech and drama shelf. No. Encyclopedias, no. Check reigsters back to 1964. No. Harry Truman, no. Mrs. Ike, no.


--Was her reading too intense?


--Grief is excess of sound. Anger is excess of form. Sadness can lack, or still exceed. Excess is overtone, the note beyond the note you sound. Without the tone, there is no object. Did I kill Bin Laden? No. But I tried.


--My task is to inventory sentences, place them in order, box them up and ship them in a container. They are a sturdy furniture, haphazard art. They are boxes of papers, bills, pieces of a dissertation. A computer shopper magazine (discard). Titles whose aura was a life, or two, or three. The house is now full of light. A girl wanders through the rooms, trying keys at the windows. My mother knows none of this.


--My father might be in the garden, or the scarecrow that wears his hat. Let him wander the house this last, inspect the plumbing, lights, air conditioning, the rows of beans, sort through medals, papers, release them as excess.


posted by Susan at 12:44 PM 0 comments

"
"

Not the peace of a cease-fire,not even the vision of the wolf and the lamb,but ratheras in the heart when the excitement is overand you can talk only about a great weariness.I know that I know how to kill,that makes me an adult.And my son plays with a toy gun that knowshow to open and close its eyes and say Mama.A peace without the big noise of beating swords into ploughshares,without words, withoutthe thud of the heavy rubber stamp: let it belight, floating, like lazy white foam.A little rest for the wounds—who speaks of healing?(And the howl of the orphans is passed from one generationto the next, as in a relay race:the baton never falls.)Let it come like wildflowers,suddenly, because the fieldmust have it: wildpeace.

"
"







        “Let’s be the same wound if we must bleed.


         Let’s fight side by side, even if the enemy


         is ourselves: I am yours, you are mine.”


                        —Tommy Olofsson, Sweden







I’m not interested in

who suffered the most.

I’m interested in

people getting over it.

Once when my father was a boy

a stone hit him on the head.

Hair would never grow there.

Our fingers found the tender spot

and its riddle: the boy who has fallen

stands up. A bucket of pears

in his mother’s doorway welcomes him home.

The pears are not crying.

Later his friend who threw the stone

says he was aiming at a bird.

And my father starts growing wings.

Each carries a tender spot:

something our lives forgot to give us.

A man builds a house and says,

“I am native now.”

A woman speaks to a tree in place

of her son. And olives come.

A child’s poem says,

“I don’t like wars,

they end up with monuments.”

He’s painting a bird with wings

wide enough to cover two roofs at once.

Why are we so monumentally slow?

Soldiers stalk a pharmacy:

big guns, little pills.

If you tilt your head just slightly

it’s ridiculous.

There’s a place in my brain

where hate won’t grow.

I touch its riddle: wind, and seeds.

Something pokes us as we sleep.

It’s late but everything comes next.

"
"

Erstwhile means long time gone.

A harbinger is sent before to help,

and also a sign of things

to come. Like this blue

stapler I bought at Staples.

Did you know in ancient Rome

priests called augurs studied

the future by carefully watching

whether birds were flying

together or alone, making what

honking or beeping noises

in what directions? It was called

the auspices. The air

was thus a huge announcement.

Today it’s completely

transparent, a vase. Inside it

flowers flower. Thus

a little death scent. I have

no master but always wonder,

what is making my master sad?

Maybe I do not know him.

This morning I made extra coffee

for the beloved and covered

the cup with a saucer. Skeleton

I thought, and stay

very still, whatever it was

will soon pass by and be gone.

"
"

I hate the phrase “inner life.” My attic hurts,

and I’d like to quit the committee

for naming tornadoes. Do you remember

how easy and sad it was to be young

and defined by our bicycles? My first

was yellow, and though it was no Black

Phantom or Sting-Ray but merely a Varsity

I loved the afternoon it was suddenly gone,

chasing its apian flash through the neighborhoods

with my father in vain. Like being a nuclear

family in a television show totally unaffected

by a distant war. Then we returned

to the green living room to watch the No Names

hold our Over the Hill Gang under

the monotinted chromatic defeated Super

Bowl waters. 1973, year of the Black Fly

caught in my Jell-O. Year of the Suffrage Building

on K Street NW where a few minor law firms

mingle proudly with the Union of Butchers

and Meat Cutters. A black hand

already visits my father in sleep, moving

up his spine to touch his amygdala. I will

never know a single thing anyone feels,

just how they say it, which is why I am standing

here exactly, covered in shame and lightning,

doing what I’m supposed to do.

"
"

Drunker than Voyager I

but not as Voyager 2 I rode my blue

bike back through the darkness

to my lonely geode cave of light

awaiting nothing under the punctured

dome. I had achieved escape

velocity drinking clear liquid starlight

at the Thunderbird with a fingerless

Russian hedge fund inspector and one

who called himself The Champ. All

night I felt fine crystals cutting

my lips like rising up through

a hailstorm. And the great vacuum

cleaner that cannot be filled moved

through my chest, gathering

conversation dust and discharging

it through my borehole. During

one of many silences The Champ

took off his face and thus were many

gears to much metallic laughter

revealed. Long ago I forgot

the word which used to mean in truth

but now expresses disbelief. So

quickly did my future come. You who

are floating past me on your inward way,

please inform those glowing faces

who first gave me this shove I have

managed to rotate my brilliant

golden array despite their instructions.

"
"

Today in El Paso all the planes are asleep on the runway. The world

is in a delay. All the political consultants drinking whiskey keep

their heads down, lifting them only to look at the beautiful scarred

waitress who wears typewriter keys as a necklace. They jingle

when she brings them drinks. Outside the giant plate glass windows

the planes are completely covered in snow, it piles up on the wings.

I feel like a mountain of cell phone chargers. Each of the various

faiths of our various fathers keeps us only partly protected. I don’t

want to talk on the phone to an angel. At night before I go to sleep

I am already dreaming. Of coffee, of ancient generals, of the faces

of statues each of which has the eternal expression of one of my feelings.

I examine my feelings without feeling anything. I ride my blue bike

on the edge of the desert. I am president of this glass of water.

"
"

In his life

he neither wrote nor read.

In his life he

didn’t cut down a single tree,

didn’t slit the throat

of a single calf.

In his life he did not speak

of the New York Times

behind its back,

didn’t raise

his voice to a soul

except in his saying:

“Come in, please,

by God, you can’t refuse.”

 

               —

 

Nevertheless—

his case is hopeless,

his situation

desperate.

His God-given rights are a grain of salt

tossed into the sea.

 

Ladies and gentlemen of the jury:

about his enemies

my client knows not a thing.

And I can assure you,

were he to encounter

the entire crew

of the aircraft carrier Enterprise,

he’d serve them eggs

sunny-side up,

and labneh

fresh from the bag.

"
"

The street is empty

as a monk’s memory,

and faces explode in the flames

like acorns—

and the dead crowd the horizon

and doorways.

No vein can bleed

more than it already has,

no scream will rise

higher than it’s already risen.

We will not leave!

 

Everyone outside is waiting

for the trucks and the cars

loaded with honey and hostages.

We will not leave!

The shields of light are breaking apart

before the rout and the siege;

outside, everyone wants us to leave.

But we will not leave!

 

Ivory white brides

behind their veils

slowly walk in captivity’s glare, waiting,

and everyone outside wants us to leave,

but we will not leave!

 

The big guns pound the jujube groves,

destroying the dreams of the violets,

extinguishing bread, killing the salt,

unleashing thirst

and parching lips and souls.

And everyone outside is saying:

“What are we waiting for?

Warmth we’re denied,

the air itself has been seized!

Why aren’t we leaving?”

Masks fill the pulpits and brothels,

the places of ablution.

Masks cross-eyed with utter amazement;

they do not believe what is now so clear,

and fall, astonished,

writhing like worms, or tongues.

We will not leave!

 

Are we in the inside only to leave?

Leaving is just for the masks,

for pulpits and conventions.

Leaving is just

for the siege-that-comes-from-within,

the siege that comes from the Bedouin’s loins,

the siege of the brethren

tarnished by the taste of the blade

and the stink of crows.

We will not leave!

 

Outside they’re blocking the exits

and offering their blessings to the impostor,

praying, petitioning

Almighty God for our deaths.

 

                                                   5.11.1983

"
"

You asked me once,

on our way back

from the midmorning

trip to the spring:

“What do you hate,

and who do you love?”

 

And I answered,

from behind the eyelashes

of my surprise,

my blood rushing

like the shadow

cast by a cloud of starlings:

“I hate departure . . .

I love the spring

and the path to the spring,

and I worship the middle

hours of morning.”

And you laughed . . .

and the almond tree blossomed

and the thicket grew loud with nightingales.

 

. . . A question

now four decades old:

I salute that question’s answer;

and an answer

as old as your departure;

I salute that answer’s question . . .

 

And today,

it’s preposterous,

here we are at a friendly airport

by the slimmest of chances,

and we meet.

Ah, Lord!

we meet.

And here you are

asking—again,

it’s absolutely preposterous—

I recognized you

but you didn’t recognize me.

“Is it you?!”

But you wouldn’t believe it.

And suddenly

you burst out and asked:

“If you’re really you,

What do you hate

and who do you love?!”

 

And I answered—

my blood

fleeing the hall,

rushing in me

like the shadow

cast by a cloud of starlings:

“I hate departure,

and I love the spring,

and the path to the spring,

and I worship the middle

hours of morning.”

 

And you wept,

and flowers bowed their heads,

and doves in the silk of their sorrow stumbled.

"
"

After knowledge extinguished the last of the beautiful

fires our worship had failed to prolong, we walked

back home through pedestrian daylight, to a residence

 

humbler than the one left behind. A door without mystery,

a room without theme. For the hour that we spend

complacent at the window overlooking the garden,

 

we observe an arrangement in rust and gray-green,

a vagueness at the center whose slow, persistent

movements some sentence might explain if we had time

 

or strength for sentences. To admit that what falls

falls solitarily, lost in the permanent dusk of the particular.

That the mind that fear and disenchantment fatten

 

comes to boss the world around it, morbid as the damp-

fingered guest who rearranges the cheeses the minute the host

turns to fix her a cocktail. A disease of the will, the way

 

false birch branches arch and interlace from which

hands dangle last leaf-parchments and a very large array

of primitive bird-shapes. Their pasted feathers shake

 

in the aftermath of the nothing we will ever be content

to leave the way we found it. I love that about you.

I love that when I call you on the long drab days practicality

 

keeps one of us away from the other that I am calling

a person so beautiful to me that she has seen my awkwardness

on the actual sidewalk but she still answers anyway.

 

I say that when I fell you fell beside me and the concrete

refused to apologize. That a sparrow sat for a spell

on the windowsill today to communicate the new intelligence.

 

That the goal of objectivity depends upon one’s faith

in the accuracy of one’s perceptions, which is to say

a confidence in the purity of the perceiving instrument.

 

I won’t be dying after all, not now, but will go on living dizzily

hereafter in reality, half-deaf to reality, in the room

perfumed by the fire that our inextinguishable will begins.

"
"

1

 

The clouds part revealing a mythology of clouds

assembled in light of earliest birds, an originary

text over water over time, and that without which

 

the clouds part revealing an apology for clouds

implicit in the air where the clouds had been

recently witnessed rehearsing departure, a heartfelt phrase

 

in the push of the airborne drops and crystals

over water over time—how being made to think

oneself an obstruction between the observer

 

and the object or objects under surveillance or even

desired—or if I am felt to be beside the point

then I have wanted that, but to block a path is like

 

not being immaterial enough, or being too much

when all they want from you now is your station

cleared of its personal effects please and vanish—

 

not that they’d ever just come out and say it when

all that darting around of the eyes, all that shaky

camouflage of paper could only portend the beginning of the

 

end of your tenure at this organization, and remember

a capacity to draw meaning out of such seeming

accidence landed one here to begin with, didn’t it.

    

    

2

 

The clouds part revealing an anatomy of clouds

viewed from the midst of human speculation, a business

project undertaken in a bid to acquire and retain

 

control of the formation and movement of clouds.

As late afternoons I have witnessed the distant

towers borrow luster from a bourbon sun, in-box

 

empty, surround sound on, all my money made

in lieu of conversation—where conversation indicates

the presence of desire in the parties to embark on

 

exchange of spirit, hours forzando with heartfelt phrase—

made metaphor for it, the face on the clock tower

bright as a meteor, as if a torch were held against

 

likelihood to illuminate the time so I could watch

the calm silent progress of its hands from the luxury

appointments of my office suite, the tumult below

 

or behind me out of mind, had not my whole attention

been riveted by the human figure stood upon

the tower’s topmost pinnacle, himself surveying

 

the clouds of the future parting in antiquity, a figure

not to be mistaken, tranquilly pacing a platform

with authority: the chief executive officer of clouds.

    

3

 

The clouds part revealing blueprints of the clouds

built in glass-front factories carved into cliff-faces

which, prior to the factories’ recent construction,

 

provided dorms for clans of hamadryas baboons,

a species revered in ancient Egypt as attendants

of Thoth, god of wisdom, science, and measurement.

 

Fans conveying clouds through aluminum ducts

can be heard from up to a mile away, depending on

air temperature, humidity, the absence or presence

 

of any competing sound, its origin and its character.

It is no more impossible to grasp the baboon’s

full significance in Egyptian religious symbolism

 

than it is to determine why clouds we manufacture

provoke in an audience more positive, lasting

response than do comparable clouds occurring in nature.

 

Even those who consider natural clouds products

of conscious manufacture seem to prefer that a merely

human mind lie behind the products they admire.

 

This development may be a form of self-exalting

or else another adaptation in order that we find

the hum of machinery comforting through darkness.

    

4

 

The clouds part revealing there’s no place left to sit

myself down except for a single wingback chair

backed into a corner to face the window in which

 

the clouds part revealing the insouciance of clouds

cavorting over the backs of the people in the field

who cut the ripened barley, who gather it in sheaves,

 

who beat grain from the sheaves with wooden flails,

who shake it loose from the scaly husk around it,

who throw the now threshed grain up into the gently

 

palm-fanned air whose steady current carries off

the chaff as the grain falls to the floor, who collect

the grain from the floor painstakingly to grind it

 

into flour, who bake the flour into loaves the priest will offer

in the sanctuary, its walls washed white like milk.

To perform it repeatedly, to perform it each time

 

as if the first, to walk the dim corridor believing that

the conference it leads to might change everything,

to adhere to a possibility of reward, of betterment,

 

of moving above, with effort, the condition into which

one has been born, to whom do I owe the pleasure

of the hum to which I have been listening too long.

    

5

 

The clouds part revealing the advocates of clouds,

believers in people, ideas and things, the workers

of the united fields of clouds, supporters of the wars

 

to keep clouds safe, the devotees of heartfelt phrase

and belief you can change with water over time.

It is the habit of a settled population to give ear to

 

whatever is desirable will come to pass, a caressing

confidence—but one unfortunately not borne out

by human experience, for most things people desire

 

have been desired ardently for thousands of years

and observe—they are no closer to realization today

than in Ramses’ time. Nor is there cause to believe

 

they will lose their coyness on some near tomorrow.

Attempts to speed them on have been undertaken

from the beginning; plans to force them overnight

 

are in copious, antagonistic operation today, and yet

they have thoroughly eluded us, and chances are

they will continue to elude us until the clouds part

 

in a flash of autonomous, ardent, local brainwork—

but when the clouds start to knit back together again,

we’ll dismiss the event as a glitch in transmission.

    

6

 

The clouds part revealing a congregation of bodies

united into one immaterial body, a fictive person

around whom the air is blurred with money, force

 

from which much harm will come, to whom my welfare

matters nothing. I sense without turning the light

from their wings, their eyes; they preen themselves

 

on the fire escape, the windowsill, their pink feet

vulnerable—a mistake to think of them that way.

If I turn around, the room might not be full of wings

 

capable of acting, in many respects, as a single being,

which is to say that I myself may be the source of

what I sense, but am no less powerless to change it.

 

Always around me, on my body, in my mouth, I fear them

and their love of money, everything I do without

thinking to help them make it. And if I am felt to be

 

beside the point, I have wanted that, to live apart

from what depends on killing me a little bit to keep

itself alive, and yet not happily, with all its needs

 

and comforts met, but fattened so far past that point

I am engrossed, and if I picture myself outside of it

it isn’t me anymore, but a parasite cast out, inviable.

    

    

7

 

The clouds part revealing the distinction between

words without meaning and meaning without words,

a phenomenon of nature, the westbound field

 

of low air pressure developing over water over time

and warm, saturated air on the sea surface rising

steadily replaced by cold air from above, the cycle

 

repeating, the warm moving upward into massive

thunderclouds, the cold descending into the eye

around which bands of thunderclouds spiral, counter-

 

clockwise, often in the hundreds, the atmospheric

pressure dropping even further, making winds

accelerate, the clouds revolve, a confusion of energy,

 

an incomprehensible volume of rain—I remember

the trick of thinking through infinity, a crowd of eyes

against an asphalt wall, my vision of it scrolling

 

left as the crowd thinned out to a spatter and then

just black until I fall asleep and then just black again,

past marketing, past focus groups, past human

 

resources, past management, past personal effects,

their insignificance evident in the eye of the dream

and through much of the debriefing I wake into next.

"
"

That figure in the cellarage you hear upsetting boxes

is an antic of the mind, a baroque imp cobbled

up under bulbs whose flickering perplexes night’s

 

impecunious craftsman, making what he makes

turn out irregular, awry, every effort botched

in its own wrong way. You belong, I said, laid out chalk-

 

white between a layer of tautened cotton gauze

and another of the selfsame rubbish that you are

wreaking havoc on tonight—and it didn’t disagree.

 

What’s more, I said, you are amiss in this ad hoc quest

for origin and purpose. Whatever destiny it is

you are meant to aspire to before you retire to

 

that soup-bowl of oblivion such figments as we

expect to find final rest in couldn’t possibly be

contained in these boxes. And again—no contest.

 

And when I was in need, I said, you raveled off

in the long-winded ploys of a winless October,

unfaithful to the one whose instincts had devised you . . .

 

—At this, the figure dropped the box from its hands,

turned down a dock I remembered and wept.

I followed it down there, sat beside it and wept.

 

Looking out on the water in time we came to see

being itself had made things fall apart this way.

We envied the simplicity implicit in sea-sponges

 

and similar marine life, their resistance to changes

across millennia we took to be deliberate, an art

practiced untheatrically beneath the water’s surface.

 

We admired the example the whole sea set, actually.

Maritime pauses flew like gulls in our exchanges.

We wondered that much longer before we had left.

"
"

1

 

A pity the selfsame vehicle that spirits me away from

factories of tedium should likewise serve to drag

me backwards into panic, or that panic should erect

 

massive factories of its own, their virulent pollutants

havocking loved waterways, frothing all the reed-

fringed margins acid pink and gathering in the shell

 

and soft tissues of the snails unknowingly in danger

as they inch up stems. Through the bulkhead door

I can hear their spirals plunk into the sluggish south-

 

bound current and dissolve therein with such brutal

regularity their dying has given rise to the custom

of measuring time here in a unit known as the snailsdeath.

 

The snailsdeath refers to the average length of time,

about 43 seconds, elapsing between the loss of the first

snail to toxic waters and the loss of the next, roughly

 

equivalent to the pause between swallows in a human

throat, while the adverb here refers to my person

and all its outskirts, beginning on the so-called cellular

 

level extending more of less undaunted all the way down

to the vale at the foot of the bed. I often fear I’ll wake

to find you waiting there and won’t know how to speak

 

on the subject of my production, or rather my woeful

lack thereof, but in your absence, once again, I will begin

drafting apologies in a language ineffectual as doves.

 

 

    

2

 

Daybreak on my marshland: a single egret, blotched,

trudges through the froth. I take its photograph

from the rooftop observation deck from which I watch

 

day’s delivery trucks advance. I take advantage of

the quiet before their arrival to organize my thoughts

on the paranormal thusly: (1) If the human psyche

 

has proven spirited enough to produce such a range

of material effects upon what we’ll call the closed

system of its custodial body, indeed if it’s expected to,

 

and (2) If such effects might be thought to constitute

the physical expression of that psyche, an emanation

willed into matter in a manner not unlike a brand-

 

new car or cream-filled cake or disposable camera,

and (3) If the system of the body can be swapped out

for another, maybe an abandoned factory or a vale,

 

then might it not also prove possible for the psyche

by aptitude or lather or sheer circumstance to impress

its thumbprint on some other system, a production

 

in the basement, or in a video store, as when I find you

inching up steps or down a shady aisle or pathway,

dragging your long chains behind you most morosely

 

if you ask me, the question is: Did you choose this, or was it

imposed on you, but even as I ask your hands move

wildly about your throat to indicate you cannot speak.

    

 

 

3

 

After the memory of the trucks withdrawing heavy

with their cargo fans out and fades into late-morning

hunger, I relocate in time to the lit bank of vending

 

machines still humming in the staff-room corner for a light

meal of cheese curls, orange soda, and what history

will come to mourn as the last two cream-filled cakes.

 

Eating in silence, a breeze in the half-light, absently

thinking of trying not to think, I imagine the Bethlehem

steel smokestacks above me piping nonstop, the sky

 

wide open without any question, steam and dioxides

of carbon and sulfur, hands pressed to the wall as I walk

down the corridor to stop myself from falling awake

 

again on the floor in embarrassment. If there’s any use

of imagination more productive or time less painful

it hasn’t tried hard enough to push through to find me

 

wandering the wings of a ghost-run factory as Earth

approaches the dark vale cut in the heart of the galaxy.

Taking shots of the sunbaked fields of putrefaction

 

visible from the observation deck. Hoping to capture

what I can point to as the way it feels. Sensing my hand

in what I push away. Watching it dissolve into plumes

 

rising like aerosols, or like ghosts of indigenous peoples,

or the lump in the throat to keep me from saying that

surviving almost everything has felt like having killed it.

 

 

 

4

 

 

(Plunk) Up from the floor with the sun to the sound of

dawn’s first sacrifice to the residues of commerce.

On autofog, on disbelief: rejuvenation in a boxer brief

 

crashed three miles wide in the waves off Madagascar,

cause of great flooding in the Bible and in Gilgamesh.

Massive sphere of rock and ice, of all events in history

 

(Plunk) thought to be the lethalmost. A snailsdeath

semiquavers from pang to ghost where the habit of ghosts

of inhabiting timepieces, of conniving their phantom

 

tendrils through parlor air and into the escapements

of some inoperative heirloom clock on a mantel shows

not the dead’s ongoing interest in their old adversary

 

(Plunk) time so much as an urge to return to the hard

mechanical kind of being. An erotic lounging to reanimate

the long-inert pendulum. As I have felt you banging

 

nights in my machine, jostling the salt from a pretzel.

This passion for the material realm after death however

refuses to be reconciled with a willingness to destroy

 

(Plunk) it while alive. When the last of the human voices

told me what I had to do, they rattled off a shopping

list of artifacts they wanted thrown down open throats.

 

That left me feeling in on it, chosen, a real fun-time guy

albeit somewhat sleep-deprived; detail-oriented, modern,

yes, but also dubious, maudlin, bedridden, speechless.

 

 

5

 

Graffiti on the stonework around the service entrance

makes the doorway at night look like the mystagogic

mouth of a big beast, amphibious, outfitted with fangs,

 

snout, the suggestion of a tongue, throat, and alimentary

canal leading to a complex of caves, tunnels, temples . . .

There are rooms I won’t enter, at whose threshold I say

 

this is as far as I go, no farther, almost as if I can sense

there’s something in there I don’t want to see, or for which

to see means having wanted already to forget, unless

 

stepping into the mouth at last, pressed into its damp,

the advantage of not knowing is swapped out for the loss

of apartness from what you’d held unknown, meaning

 

you don’t come to know it so much as become it, wholly

warping into its absorbent fold. I can’t let that happen

if it hasn’t already. What draws me on might be thought

 

canine, keen-sighted, but it’s still incapable of divining why

the constant hum around or inside me has to choose

among being a nocturne of toxic manufacture, the call

 

of what remains of the jungle, or else just another prank

on my gullible anatomy. Am I not beset in the utmost

basement of industry? Is that basement itself not beset

 

by the broad, black-green, waxy leaves of Mesoamerica?

And haven’t I parted those selfsame leaves, discovering me

asleep on my own weapon, threat to no one but myself?

 

 

 

6

 

Asked again what I miss the most about my former life,

I remember to pause this time, look left, a little off-camera

an entire snailsdeath, an air of sifting the possibilities,

 

I eliminate certain objects and events from the running

right off the bat, such as when their great displeasure

brought the gods to turn to darkness all that had been

 

light, submerging mountaintops in stormwater, the gods

shocked by their own power, and heartsick to watch

their once dear people stippling the surf like little fishes.

 

Or when the flaming peccary of a comet struck the earth

with much the same effect, waves as high as ziggurats

crashing mathematically against our coastlines, scalding

 

plumes of vapor and aerosols tossed into the atmosphere

spawning storms to pummel the far side of the earth,

approximately 80 percent of all life vanished in a week.

 

Or when we squandered that very earth and shat on it

with much the same effect, and more or less on purpose,

emitting nonstop gases in the flow of our production,

 

shoveling it in as ancient icecaps melted, what difference

could another make now. And so I clear my throat, look

directly into the camera, and even though it will make me

 

come off bovine in their eyes, I say that what I miss the most

has to be those cream-filled cakes I used to like, but then

they prod me with their volts and lead me back to the barn.

 

 

 

7

 

After the panic grew more of less customary, the pity

dissolved into a mobile fogbank, dense, reducing visibility

from the rooftop observation deck. Mobile in the sense

 

that it possessed mobility, not in the sense that it actually

moved. Because it didn’t. It just stayed there, reducing

visibility but not in the sense that it simply diminished it

 

or diminished it partly. Because it didn’t. It pretty much

managed to do away with it altogether, as my photography

will come to show: field after field of untouched white.

 

After the possibility of change grew funny, threadbare,

too embarrassing to be with, I eased into the knowledge

that you’d never appear at the foot of the bed, the vale

 

turned into a lifetime’s heap of laundry, and not the gentle

tuffets and streambanks of an afterlife it seems we only

imagined remembering, that watercolor done in greens

 

and about which I predicted its monotony of fair weather

over time might deaden one all over again, unless being

changed with death means not only changing past change

 

but past even the wish for it. I worried to aspire towards

that condition might actually dull one’s aptitude for change.

That I would grow to protect what I wished to keep from

 

change at the cost of perpetuating much that required it.

In this sense I had come to resemble the fogbank, at once

given to motion but no less motionless than its photograph.

 

The last time I saw myself alive, I drew the curtain back

from the bed, stood by my sleeping body. I felt tenderness

towards it. I knew how long it had waited, and how little

 

time remained for it to prepare its bundle of grave-goods.

When I tried to speak, rather than my voice, my mouth

released the tight, distinctive shriek of an aerophone of clay.

 

I wanted to stop the shock of that from taking away from

what I felt. I couldn’t quite manage it. Even at this late hour,

even here, the purity of a feeling is ruined by the world.

    

8

 

The noises from the basement were not auspicious noises.

I wanted to live forever. I wanted to live forever and die

right then and there. I had heard the tight, distinctive shriek.

 

Here again and now. I no longer have legs. I am sleeping.

Long tendrils of tobacco smoke, composed of carbon dioxide,

water vapor, ammonia, nitrogen oxide, hydrogen cyanide,

 

and 4,000 other chemical compounds, penetrate the room

through the gap beneath the door and through heating vents

with confidence. They are the spectral forms of anaconda.

 

The ruler of the underworld smokes cigars. A certain brand.

Hand-rolled. He smiles as if there is much to smile about.

And there is. He is hollow-eyed, toothless. His hat, infamous:

 

broad-brimmed, embellished with feathers, a live macaw.

His cape is depicted, often, as a length of fabric in distinctive

black and white chevrons. Otherwise, as here, the full pelt

 

of a jaguar. On a barge of plywood and empty milk cartons

he trudges through the froth. He is the lord of black sorcery

and lord of percussion. He is patron of commerce. He parts

 

the leaves of Mesoamerica, traveling with a retinue of drunken

ax wielders, collection agents. His scribe is a white rabbit.

Daughter of moon and of night. Elsewhere, you are having

 

your teeth taken out. There is no music left, but I still feel held

captive by the cinema, and in its custom, I believe myself

capable of protecting myself by hiding my face in my hands.

"
"

    We forget that we are all dead men conversing with dead men.

                                                                  —"
"

I slid the white louvers shut so I could stand in your closet a little while among the throng of flowered dresses you hadn’t worn in years, and touch the creases on each of their sleeves that smelled of forgivenessand even though you would still be alive a few more days I knew they were ready to let themselves be packed into liquor store boxes simply because you had asked that of them,and dropped at the door of the Salvation Army without having noticed me wrapping my arms around so many at once that one slipped a big padded shoulder off of its hanger as if to return the embrace.

"
"

1

 

What does not change / is the will to change

 

He woke, fully clothed, in his bed. He

remembered only one thing, the birds, how

when he came in, he had gone around the rooms

and got them back in their cage, the green one first,

she with the bad leg, and then the blue,

the one they had hoped was a male

 

Otherwise? Yes, Fernand, who had talked lispingly of Albers & Angkor Vat.

He had left the party without a word. How he got up, got into his coat,

I do not know. When I saw him, he was at the door, but it did not matter,

he was already sliding along the wall of the night, losing himself

in some crack of the ruins. That it should have been he who said, “The kingfishers!

who cares

for their feathers

now?”

 

His last words had been, “The pool is slime.” Suddenly everyone,

ceasing their talk, sat in a row around him, watched

they did not so much hear, or pay attention, they

wondered, looked at each other, smirked, but listened,

he repeated and repeated, could not go beyond his thought

“The pool    the kingfishers’ feathers were wealth    why

did the export stop?”

 

It was then he left

 

 

2

 

I thought of the E on the stone, and of what Mao said

la lumiere”

                    but the kingfisher

de l’aurore”

                    but the kingfisher flew west

est devant nous!

                    he got the color of his breast

                    from the heat of the setting sun!

 

The features are, the feebleness of the feet (syndactylism of the 3rd & 4th digit)

the bill, serrated, sometimes a pronounced beak, the wings

where the color is, short and round, the tail

inconspicuous.

 

But not these things were the factors. Not the birds.

The legends are

legends. Dead, hung up indoors, the kingfisher

will not indicate a favoring wind,

or avert the thunderbolt. Nor, by its nesting,

still the waters, with the new year, for seven days.

It is true, it does nest with the opening year, but not on the waters.

It nests at the end of a tunnel bored by itself in a bank. There,

six or eight white and translucent eggs are laid, on fishbones

not on bare clay, on bones thrown up in pellets by the birds.

 

                                                   On these rejectamenta

(as they accumulate they form a cup-shaped structure) the young are born.

And, as they are fed and grow, this nest of excrement and decayed fish becomes

                                                              a dripping, fetid mass

 

Mao concluded:

                   nous devons

                                       nous lever

                                                         et agir!

 

 

3

 

When the attentions change / the jungle

leaps in

             even the stones are split

                                             they rive

 

Or,

enter

that other conqueror we more naturally recognize

he so resembles ourselves

 

But the E

cut so rudely on that oldest stone

sounded otherwise,

was differently heard

 

as, in another time, were treasures used:

 

(and, later, much later, a fine ear thought

a scarlet coat)

 

                       “of green feathers    feet, beaks and eyes

                        of gold

 

                       “animals likewise,

                        resembling snails

 

                       “a large wheel, gold, with figures of unknown four-foots,

                        and worked with tufts of leaves, weight

                        3800 ounces

 

                       “last, two birds, of thread and featherwork, the quills

                        gold, the feet

                        gold, the two birds perched on two reeds

 

                        gold, the reeds arising from two embroidered mounds,

                        one yellow, the other

                        white.

 

                                     “And from each reed hung

                                      seven feathered tassels.

 

In this instance, the priests

(in dark cotton robes, and dirty,

their disheveled hair matted with blood, and flowing wildly

over their shoulders)

rush in among the people, calling on them

to protect their gods

 

And all now is war

where so lately there was peace,

and the sweet brotherhood, the use

of tilled fields.

 

 

4

 

Not one death but many,

not accumulation but change, the feed-back proves, the feed-back is

the law

 

                 Into the same river no man steps twice

                 When fire dies air dies

                 No one remains, nor is, one

 

Around an appearance, one common model, we grow up

many. Else how is it,

if we remain the same,

we take pleasure now

in what we did not take pleasure before? love

contrary objects? admire and / or find fault? use

other words, feel other passions, have

nor figure, appearance, disposition, tissue

the same?

         To be in different states without a change

         is not a possibility

 

We can be precise. The factors are

in the animal and / or the machine the factors are

communication and / or control, both involve

the message. And what is the message? The message is

a discrete or continuous sequence of measurable events distributed in time

 

is the birth of the air, is

the birth of water, is

a state between

the origin and

the end, between

birth and the beginning of

another fetid nest

 

is change, presents

no more than itself

 

And the too strong grasping of it,

when it is pressed together and condensed,

loses it

 

This very thing you are

 

 

                                                II

 

                  They buried their dead in a sitting posture

                  serpent    cane    razor   ray of the sun

 

                  And she sprinkled water on the head of my child, crying

                  “Cioa-coatl! Cioa-coatl!”

                  with her face to the west

 

                Where the bones are found, in each personal heap

                with what each enjoyed, there is always

                the Mongolian louse

 

The light is in the east. Yes. And we must rise, act. Yet

in the west, despite the apparent darkness (the whiteness

which covers all), if you look, if you can bear, if you can, long enough

 

                       as long as it was necessary for him, my guide

                       to look into the yellow of that longest-lasting rose

 

so you must, and, in that whiteness, into that face, with what candor, look

 

and, considering the dryness of the place

              the long absence of an adequate race

 

                   (of the two who first came, each a conquistador, one healed, the other

                   tore the eastern idols down, toppled

                   the temple walls, which, says the excuser

                   were black from human gore)

 

hear

hear, where the dry blood talks

         where the old appetite walks

 

                                                                   la piu saporita et migliore

                                                                   che si possa truovar al mondo

 

where it hides, look

in the eye how it runs

in the flesh / chalk

 

                       but under these petals

                       in the emptiness

                       regard the light, contemplate

                       the flower

 

whence it arose

 

               with what violence benevolence is bought

               what cost in gesture justice brings

               what wrongs domestic rights involve

               what stalks

               this silence

 

               what pudor pejorocracy affronts

               how awe, night-rest and neighborhood can rot

               what breeds where dirtiness is law

               what crawls

               below

 

 

                                                    III

 

                      I am no Greek, hath not th’advantage.

                      And of course, no Roman:

                      he can take no risk that matters,

                      the risk of beauty least of all.

 

                      But I have my kin, if for no other reason than

                      (as he said, next of kin) I commit myself, and,

                      given my freedom, I’d be a cad

                      if I didn’t. Which is most true.

 

                      It works out this way, despite the disadvantage.

                      I offer, in explanation, a quote:

                      si j’ai du goût, ce n’est guères

                      que pour la terre et les pierres.

 

                      Despite the discrepancy (an ocean    courage    age)

                      this is also true: if I have any taste

                      it is only because I have interested myself

                      in what was slain in the sun

 

                              I pose you your question:

 

                      shall you uncover honey / where maggots are?

 

                              I hunt among stones

"
"

As the dead prey upon us,

they are the dead in ourselves,

awake, my sleeping ones, I cry out to you,

disentangle the nets of being!

 

I pushed my car, it had been sitting so long unused.

I thought the tires looked as though they only needed air.

But suddenly the huge underbody was above me, and the rear tires

were masses of rubber and thread variously clinging together

 

as were the dead souls in the living room, gathered

about my mother, some of them taking care to pass

beneath the beam of the movie projector, some record

playing on the victrola, and all of them

desperate with the tawdriness of their life in hell

 

I turned to the young man on my right and asked, “How is it,

there?” And he begged me protestingly don’t ask, we are poor

poor. And the whole room was suddenly posters and presentations

of brake linings and other automotive accessories, cardboard

displays, the dead roaming from one to another

as bored back in life as they are in hell, poor and doomed

to mere equipments

 

                               my mother, as alive as ever she was, asleep

when I entered the house as I often found her in a rocker

under the lamp, and awaking, as I came up to her, as she ever had

 

I found out she returns to the house once a week, and with her

the throng of the unknown young who center on her as much in death

as other like suited and dressed people did in life

 

O the dead!

 

                    and the Indian woman and I

                    enabled the blue deer

                    to walk

 

                    and the blue deer talked,

                    in the next room,

                    a Negro talk

 

                    it was like walking a jackass,

                    and its talk

                    was the pressing gabber of gammers

                    of old women

 

                    and we helped walk it around the room

                    because it was seeking socks

                    or shoes for its hooves

                    now that it was acquiring

 

                    human possibilities

 

In the five hindrances men and angels

stay caught in the net, in the immense nets

which spread out across each plane of being, the multiple nets

which hamper at each step of the ladders as the angels

and the demons

and men

go up and down

 

                                 Walk the jackass

                                 Hear the victrola

                                 Let the automobile

                                 be tucked into a corner of the white fence

                                 when it is a white chair. Purity

 

is only an instant of being, the trammels

recur

 

In the five hindrances, perfection

is hidden

                                 I shall get

                                 to the place

                                 10 minutes late.

 

                                 It will be 20 minutes

                                 of 9. And I don’t know,

 

                                 without the car,

 

                                 how I shall get there

 

O peace, my mother, I do not know

how differently I could have done

what I did or did not do.

                                 That you are back each week

                                 that you fall asleep

                                 with your face to the right

 

                                 that you are present there

                                 when I come in as you were

                                 when you were alive

 

                                 that you are as solid, and your flesh

                                 is as I knew it, that you have the company

                                 I am used to your having

 

                                 but o, that you all find it

                                 such a cheapness!

 

o peace, mother, for the mammothness

of the comings and goings

of the ladders of life

 

The nets we are entangled in. Awake,

my soul, let the power into the last wrinkle

of  being, let none of the threads and rubber of the tires

be left upon the earth. Let even your mother

go. Let there be only paradise

 

The desperateness is, that the instant

which is also paradise (paradise

is happiness) dissolves

into the next instant, and power

flows to meet the next occurrence

 

                                 Is it any wonder

                                 my mother comes back?

                                 Do not that throng

                                 rightly seek the room

                                 where they might expect

                                 happiness? They did not complain

                                 of life, they obviously wanted

                                 the movie, each other, merely to pass

                                 among each other there,

                             where the real is, even to the display cards,

                             to be out of hell

 

                             The poverty

                             of hell

O souls, in life and in death,

make, even as you sleep, even in sleep

know what wind

even under the crankcase of the ugly automobile

lifts it away, clears the sodden weights of goods,

equipment, entertainment, the foods the Indian woman,

the filthy blue deer, the 4 by 3 foot ‘Viewbook,’

the heaviness of the old house, the stuffed inner room

lifts the sodden nets

 

                                 and they disappear as ghosts do,

                                 as spider webs, nothing

                                 before the hand of man

 

                                 The vent! You must have the vent,

                                 or you shall die. Which means

                                 never to die, the ghastliness

 

                                 of going, and forever

                                 coming back, returning

                                 to the instants which were not lived

 

                                 O mother, this I could not have done,

                                 I could not have lived what you didn’t,

                                 I am myself netted in my own being

 

                                 I want to die. I want to make that instant, too,

                                 perfect

 

                                 O my soul, slip

                                 the cog

 

 

II

 

The death in life (death itself)

is endless, eternity

is the false cause

 

The knot is other wise, each topological corner

presents itself, and no sword

cuts it, each knot is itself its fire

 

each knot of which the net is made

is for the hands to untake

the knot’s making. And touch alone

can turn the knot into its own flame

 

                          (o mother, if you had once touched me

 

                          o mother, if I had once touched you)

 

The car did not burn. Its underside

was not presented to me

a grotesque corpse. The old man

 

merely removed it as I looked up at it,

and put it in a corner of the picket fence

like was it my mother’s white dog?

 

or a child’s chair

 

                                 The woman,

                                 playing on the grass,

                                 with her son (the woman next door)

 

                                 was angry with me whatever it was

                                 slipped across the playpen or whatever

                                 she had out there on the grass

 

                                 And I was quite flip in reply

                                 that anyone who used plastic

                                 had to expect things to skid

 

                                 and break, that I couldn’t worry

                                 that her son might have been hurt

                                 by whatever it was I sent skidding

 

                                 down on them.

 

                                 It was just then I went into my house

                                 and to my utter astonishment

                                 found my mother sitting there

 

                                 as she always had sat, as must she always

                                 forever sit there her head lolling

                                 into sleep? Awake, awake my mother

 

                                 what wind will lift you too

                                 forever from the tawdriness,

                                 make you rich as all those souls

 

                                 crave crave crave

 

                                 to be rich?

 

They are right. We must have

what we want. We cannot afford

not to. We have only one course:

 

the nets which entangle us are flames

 

                                         O souls, burn

                                         alive, burn now

 

                                         that you may forever

                                         have peace, have

 

                                         what you crave

 

                                         O souls,

                                         go into everything,

                                         let not one knot pass

                                         through your fingers

 

                                         let not any they tell you

                                         you must sleep as the net

                                         comes through your authentic hands

 

                                         What passes

                                         is what is, what shall be, what has

                                         been, what hell and heaven is

                                         is earth to be rent, to shoot you

                                         through the screen of flame which each knot

                                         hides as all knots are a wall ready

                                         to be shot open by you

 

                                                                               the nets of being

                                         are only eternal if you sleep as your hands

                                         ought to be busy. Method, method

 

                                         I too call on you to come

                                         to the aid of all men, to women most

                                         who know most, to woman to tell

                                         men to awake. Awake, men,

                                         awake

 

I ask my mother

to sleep. I ask her

to stay in the chair.

My chair

is in the corner of the fence.

She sits by the fireplace made of paving stones. The blue deer

need not trouble either of us.

 

And if she sits in happiness the souls

who trouble her and me

will also rest. The automobile

 

has been hauled away.

"
"

I. Le Bonheur

dogwood flakes

what is green

 

the petals

from the apple

blow on the road

 

mourning doves

mark the sway

of the afternoon, bees

dig the plum blossoms

 

the morning

stands up straight, the night

is blue from the full of the April moon

 

iris and lilac, birds

birds, yellow flowers

white flowers, the Diesel

does not let up dragging

the plow

 

               as the whippoorwill,

the night’s tractor, grinds

his song

 

 

              and no other birds but us

are as busy (O saisons, O chateaux!

Délires!

 

                What soul

is without fault?

 

Nobody studies

happiness

 

Every time the cock crows

I salute him

 

I have no longer any excuse

for envy. My life

 

has been given its orders: the seasons

seize

 

the soul and the body, and make mock

of any dispersed effort. The hour of death

 

is the only trespass

 

 

II. The Charge

 

dogwood flakes

the green

 

the petals from the apple-trees

fall for the feet to walk on

 

the birds are so many they are

loud, in the afternoon

 

they distract, as so many bees do

suddenly all over the place

 

With spring one knows today to see

that in the morning each thing

 

is separate but by noon

they have melted into each other

 

and by night only crazy things

like the full moon and the whippoorwill

 

and us, are busy. We are busy

if we can get by that whiskered bird,

 

that nightjar, and get across, the moon

is our conversation, she will say

 

what soul

isn’t in default?

 

can you afford not to make

the magical study

 

which happiness is? do you hear

the cock when he crows? do you know the charge,

 

that you shall have no envy, that your life

has its orders, that the seasons

 

seize you too, that no body and soul are one

if they are not wrought

 

in this retort? that otherwise efforts

are efforts? And that the hour of your flight

 

will be the hour of your death?

 

 

III. Spring

 

The dogwood

lights up the day.

 

The April moon

flakes the night.

 

Birds, suddenly,

are a multitude

 

The flowers are ravined

by bees, the fruit blossoms

 

are thrown to the ground, the wind

the rain forces everything. Noise—

 

even the night is drummed

by whippoorwills, and we get

 

as busy, we plow, we move,

we break out, we love. The secret

 

which got lost neither hides

nor reveals itself, it shows forth

 

tokens. And we rush

to catch up. The body

 

whips the soul. In its great desire

it demands the elixir

 

In the roar of spring,

transmutations. Envy

 

drags herself off. The fault of the body and the soul

—that they are not one—

 

the matutinal cock clangs

and singleness: we salute you

 

season of no bungling

"
"

The landscape (the landscape!) again: Gloucester,

the shore one of me is (duplicates), and from which

(from offshore, I, Maximus) am removed, observe.

 

In this night I moved on the territory with combinations

(new mixtures) of old and known personages: the leader,

my father, in an old guise, here selling books and manuscripts.

 

My thought was, as I looked in the window of his shop,

there should be materials here for Maximus, when, then,

I saw he was the young musician has been there (been before me)

 

before. It turned out it wasn’t a shop, it was a loft (wharf-

house) in which, as he walked me around, a year ago

came back (I had been there before, with my wife and son,

 

I didn’t remember, he presented me insinuations via

himself and his girl) both of whom I had known for years.

But never in Gloucester. I had moved them in, to my country.

 

His previous appearance had been in my parents’ bedroom where I

found him intimate with my former wife: this boy

was now the Librarian of Gloucester, Massachusetts!

 

                         Black space,

                         old fish-house.

                         Motions

                         of ghosts.

                         I,

                         dogging

                         his steps.

                         He

                         (not my father,

                         by name himself

                         with his face

                         twisted

                         at birth)

                         possessed of knowledge

                         pretentious

                         giving me

                         what in the instant

                         I knew better of.

 

                         But the somber

                         place, the flooring

                         crude like a wharf’s

                         and a barn’s

                         space

 

 

I was struck by the fact I was in Gloucester, and that my daughter

was there—that I would see her! She was over the Cut. I

hadn’t even connected her with my being there, that she was

 

here. That she was there (in the Promised Land—the Cut!

But there was this business, of poets, that all my Jews

were in the fish-house too, that the Librarian had made a party

 

I was to read. They were. There were many of them, slumped

around. It was not for me. I was outside. It was the Fort.

The Fort was in East Gloucester—old Gorton’s Wharf, where the Library

 

was. It was a region of coal houses, bins. In one a gang

was beating someone to death, in a corner of the labyrinth

of fences. I could see their arms and shoulders whacking

 

down. But not the victim. I got out of there. But cops

tailed me along the Fort beach toward the Tavern

 

                         The places still

                         half-dark, mud,

                         coal dust.

 

                         There is no light

                         east

                         of the Bridge

 

                         Only on the headland

                         toward the harbor

                         from Cressy’s

 

                         have I seen it (once

                         when my daughter ran

                         out on a spit of sand

 

                         isn’t even there.) Where

                         is Bristow? when does I-A

                         get me home? I am caught

 

                         in Gloucester. (What’s buried

                         behind Lufkin’s

                         Diner? Who is

 

                         Frank Moore? 

"
"

And then went down to the ship,

Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and

We set up mast and sail on that swart ship,

Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also

Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward

Bore us out onward with bellying canvas,

Circe’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.

Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller,

Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.

Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean,

Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,

To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities

Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever

With glitter of sun-rays

Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven

Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.

The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place

Aforesaid by Circe.

Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus,

And drawing sword from my hip

I dug the ell-square pitkin;

Poured we libations unto each the dead,

First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour.

Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death’s-heads;

As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best

For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods,

A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.

Dark blood flowed in the fosse,

Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides

Of youths and of the old who had borne much;

Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender,

Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads,

Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,

These many crowded about me; with shouting,

Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts;

Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze;

Poured ointment, cried to the gods,

To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine;

Unsheathed the narrow sword,

I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead,

Till I should hear Tiresias.

But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor,

Unburied, cast on the wide earth,

Limbs that we left in the house of Circe,

Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other.

Pitiful spirit.   And I cried in hurried speech:

“Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?

“Cam’st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?”

              And he in heavy speech:

“Ill fate and abundant wine.    I slept in Circe’s ingle.

“Going down the long ladder unguarded,

“I fell against the buttress,

“Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.

“But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied,

“Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed:“A man of no fortune, and with a name to come. 

“And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows.”

 

And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban,

Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first:

“A second time? why? man of ill star,

“Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?

“Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever

“For soothsay.”

               And I stepped back,

And he strong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus

“Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas,

“Lose all companions.”  And then Anticlea came.

Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus,

In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.

And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outward and away

And unto Circe.

              Venerandam,

In the Cretan’s phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite,

Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden

Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids

Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. So that: 

"
"

I sat on the Dogana’s steps

For the gondolas cost too much, that year,

And there were not “those girls”, there was one face,

And the Buccentoro twenty yards off, howling, “Stretti”,

And the lit cross-beams, that year, in the Morosini,

And peacocks in Koré’s house, or there may have been.

              Gods float in the azure air,

Bright gods and Tuscan, back before dew was shed.

Light: and the first light, before ever dew was fallen.

Panisks, and from the oak, dryas,

And from the apple, mælid,

Through all the wood, and the leaves are full of voices,

A-whisper, and the clouds bowe over the lake,

And there are gods upon them,

And in the water, the almond-white swimmers,

The silvery water glazes the upturned nipple,

                As Poggio has remarked.

Green veins in the turquoise,

Or, the gray steps lead up under the cedars.

 

My Cid rode up to Burgos,

Up to the studded gate between two towers,

Beat with his lance butt, and the child came out,

Una niña de nueve años,

To the little gallery over the gate, between the towers,

Reading the writ, voce tinnula:

That no man speak to, feed, help Ruy Diaz,

On pain to have his heart out, set on a pike spike

And both his eyes torn out, and all his goods sequestered,

“And here, Myo Cid, are the seals,

The big seal and the writing.”

And he came down from Bivar, Myo Cid,

With no hawks left there on their perches,

And no clothes there in the presses,

And left his trunk with Raquel and Vidas,

That big box of sand, with the pawn-brokers,

To get pay for his menie;

Breaking his way to Valencia.

Ignez de Castro murdered, and a wall

Here stripped, here made to stand.

Drear waste, the pigment flakes from the stone,

Or plaster flakes, Mantegna painted the wall.

Silk tatters, “Nec Spe Nec Metu.”

"
"

Palace in smoky light,

Troy but a heap of smouldering boundary stones,

ANAXIFORMINGES!  Aurunculeia!

Hear me.   Cadmus of Golden Prows!

The silver mirrors catch the bright stones and flare,

Dawn, to our waking, drifts in the green cool light;

Dew-haze blurs, in the grass, pale ankles moving.

Beat, beat, whirr, thud, in the soft turf

                under the apple trees,

Choros nympharum, goat-foot, with the pale foot alternate;

Crescent of blue-shot waters, green-gold in the shallows,

A black cock crows in the sea-foam;

 

And by the curved, carved foot of the couch,

             claw-foot and lion head, an old man seated

Speaking in the low drone…:

                        Ityn!

Et ter flebiliter, Ityn, Ityn!

And she went toward the window and cast her down,

               “All the while, the while, swallows crying:

Ityn!

               “It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish.”

               “It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish?”

               “No other taste shall change this.”

And she went toward the window,

                      the slim white stone bar

Making a double arch;

Firm even fingers held to the firm pale stone;

Swung for a moment,

                        and the wind out of Rhodez

Caught in the full of her sleeve.

               . . .  the swallows crying:

‘Tis.  ‘Tis.  ‘Ytis!

               Actæon…

                   and a valley,

The valley is thick with leaves, with leaves, the trees,

The sunlight glitters, glitters a-top,

Like a fish-scale roof,

               Like the church roof in Poictiers

If it were gold.

               Beneath it, beneath it

Not a ray, not a slivver, not a spare disc of sunlight

Flaking the black, soft water;

Bathing the body of nymphs, of nymphs, and Diana,

Nymphs, white-gathered about her, and the air, air,

Shaking, air alight with the goddess

               fanning their hair in the dark,

Lifting, lifting and waffing:

Ivory dipping in silver,

               Shadow’d, o’ershadow’d

Ivory dipping in silver,

Not a splotch, not a lost shatter of sunlight.

Then Actæon: Vidal,

Vidal.   It is old Vidal speaking,

    stumbling along in the wood,

Not a patch, not a lost shimmer of sunlight,

                the pale hair of the goddess.

 

The dogs leap on Actæon,

                “Hither, hither, Actæon,”

Spotted stag of the wood;

Gold, gold, a sheaf of hair,

                Thick like a wheat swath,

Blaze, blaze in the sun,

                The dogs leap on Actæon.

Stumbling, stumbling along in the wood,

Muttering, muttering Ovid:

                “Pergusa… pool… pool… Gargaphia,

“Pool… pool of Salmacis.”

                The empty armour shakes as the cygnet moves.

 

Thus the light rains, thus pours, e lo soleills plovil

The liquid and rushing crystal

                beneath the knees of the gods.

Ply over ply, thin glitter of water;

Brook film bearing white petals.

The pine at Takasago

                grows with the pine of Isé!

The water whirls up the bright pale sand in the spring’s mouth

“Behold the Tree of the Visages!”

Forked branch-tips, flaming as if with lotus.

                Ply over ply

The shallow eddying fluid,

                beneath the knees of the gods.

 

Torches melt in the glare

                set flame of the corner cook-stall,

Blue agate casing the sky (as at Gourdon that time)

                the sputter of resin,

Saffron sandal so petals the narrow foot: Hymenæus Io!

                Hymen, Io Hymenæe! Aurunculeia!

One scarlet flower is cast on the blanch-white stone.

 

                And So-Gyoku, saying:

“This wind, sire, is the king’s wind,

                This wind is wind of the palace,

Shaking imperial water-jets.”

                And Hsiang, opening his collar:

“This wind roars in the earth’s bag,

                it lays the water with rushes.”

No wind is the king’s wind.

                Let every cow keep her calf.

“This wind is held in gauze curtains…”

                       No wind is the king’s…

 

The camel drivers sit in the turn of the stairs,

                Look down on Ecbatan of plotted streets,

“Danaë! Danaë!

             What wind is the king’s?”

Smoke hangs on the stream,

The peach-trees shed bright leaves in the water,

Sound drifts in the evening haze,

                The bark scrapes at the ford,

Gilt rafters above black water,

                Three steps in an open field,

Gray stone-posts leading…

 

Père Henri Jacques would speak with the Sennin, on Rokku,

Mount Rokku between the rock and the cedars,

Polhonac,

As Gyges on Thracian platter set the feast,

Cabestan, Tereus,

                It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish,

Vidal, or Ecbatan, upon the gilded tower in Ecbatan

Lay the god’s bride, lay ever, waiting the golden rain.

By Garonne.             “Saave!”

The Garonne is thick like paint,

Procession,—“Et sa’ave, sa’ave, sa’ave Regina!”—

Moves like a worm, in the crowd.

Adige, thin film of images,

Across the Adige, by Stefano, Madonna in hortulo,

As Cavalcanti had seen her.

                The Centaur’s heel plants in the earth loam.

And we sit here…

                there in the arena…

"
"

And before hell mouth; dry plain

              and two mountains;

On the one mountain, a running form,

              and another

In the turn of the hill; in hard steel

The road like a slow screw’s thread,

The angle almost imperceptible,

               so that the circuit seemed hardly to rise;

And the running form, naked, Blake,

Shouting, whirling his arms, the swift limbs,

Howling against the evil,

               his eyes rolling,

Whirling like flaming cart-wheels,

               and his head held backward to gaze on the evil

As he ran from it,

                to be hid by the steel mountain,

And when he showed again from the north side;

                his eyes blazing toward hell mouth,

His neck forward,

                and like him Peire Cardinal.

And in the west mountain, Il Fiorentino,

Seeing hell in his mirror,

                 and lo Sordels

Looking on it in his shield;

And Augustine, gazing toward the invisible.

 

And past them, the criminal

                lying in the blue lakes of acid,

The road between the two hills, upward

                slowly,

The flames patterned in lacquer, crimen est actio,

The limbo of chopped ice and saw-dust,

And I bathed myself with acid to free myself

               of the hell ticks,

Scales, fallen louse eggs.

               Palux Laerna,

the lake of bodies, aqua morta,

of limbs fluid, and mingled, like fish heaped in a bin,

and here an arm upward, clutching a fragment of marble,

And the embryos, in flux,

              new inflow, submerging,

Here an arm upward, trout, submerged by the eels;

              and from the bank, the stiff herbage

the dry nobbled path, saw many known, and unknown,

for an instant;

               submerging,

The face gone, generation.

 

               Then light, air, under saplings,

the blue banded lake under æther,

               an oasis, the stones, the calm field,

the grass quiet,

               and passing the tree of the bough

The grey stone posts,

               and the stair of gray stone,

the passage clean-squared in granite:

               descending,

and I through this, and into the earth,

               patet terra,

entered the quiet air

               the new sky,

the light as after a sun-set,

               and by their fountains, the heroes,

Sigismundo, and Malatesta Novello,

               and founders, gazing at the mounts of their cities.

 

The plain, distance, and in fount-pools

               the nymphs of that water

rising, spreading their garlands,

               weaving their water reeds with the boughs,

In the quiet,

               and now one man rose from his fountain

and went off into the plain.

 

Prone in that grass, in sleep;

               et j’entendis des voix:…

                                                           wall .  .  .  Strasbourg

Galliffet led that triple charge.  .  .  Prussians

and he said                                                            [Plarr’s narration]

                          it was for the honour of the army.

And they called him a swashbuckler.

               I didn’t know what it was

But I thought:    This is pretty bloody damn fine.

And my old nurse, he was a man nurse, and

He killed a Prussian and he lay in the street

there in front of our house for three days

And he stank.  .  .  .  .  .  .

               Brother Percy,

And our Brother Percy…

               old Admiral

He was a middy in those days,

And they came into Ragusa

.  .  .  .  .  .  place those men went for the Silk War.  .  .  .  .

And they saw a procession coming down through

A cut in the hills, carrying something

The six chaps in front carrying a long thing

               on their shoulders,

And they thought it was a funeral,

               but the thing was wrapped up in scarlet,

And he put off in the cutter,

               he was a middy in those days,

To see what the natives were doing,

And they got up to the six fellows in livery,

And they looked at it, and I can still hear the old admiral,

“Was it? it was

               Lord Byron

Dead drunk, with the face of an A  y  n.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

He pulled it out long, like that:

                the face of an a  y  n  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  gel.”

 

And because that son of a bitch,

               Franz Josef of Austria.  .  .  .  .  .

And because that son of a bitch Napoléon Barbiche…

They put Aldington on Hill 70, in a trench

               dug through corpses

With a lot of kids of sixteen,

Howling and crying for their mamas,

And he sent a chit back to his major:

               I can hold out for ten minutes

With my sergeant and a machine-gun.

               And they rebuked him for levity.

And Henri Gaudier went to it,

               and they killed him,

And killed a good deal of sculpture,

And ole T.E.H. he went to it,

With a lot of books from the library,

London Library, and a shell buried ‘em in a dug-out,

And the Library expressed its annoyance.

               And a bullet hit him on the elbow

…gone through the fellow in front of him,

And he read Kant in the Hospital, in Wimbledon,

in the original,

And the hospital staff didn’t like it.

 

And Wyndham Lewis went to it,

With a heavy bit of artillery,

               and the airmen came by with a mitrailleuse,

And cleaned out most of his company,

               and a shell lit on his tin hut,

While he was out in the privy,

               and he was all there was left of that outfit.

 

Windeler went to it,

   and he was out in the Ægæan,

And down in the hold of his ship

               pumping  gas into a sausage,

And the boatswain looked over the rail,

               down into amidships, and he said:

               Gees! look a’ the Kept’n,

The Kept’n’s a-gettin’ ‘er up.

 

And Ole Captain Baker went to it,

                with his legs full of rheumatics,

So much so he couldn’t run,

                 so he was six months in hospital,

Observing the mentality of the patients.

 

And Fletcher was 19 when he went to it,

And his major went mad in the control pit,

        about  midnight, and started throwing the ‘phone about

And he had to keep him quiet

               till abut six in the morning,

And direct that bunch of artillery.

 

And Ernie Hemingway went to it,

               too much in a hurry,

And they buried him for four days.

 

Et ma foi, vous savez,

               tous les nerveux.  Non,

Y a une limite; les bêtes, les bêtes ne sont

Pas faites pour ça, c’est peu de chose un cheval.

Les hommes de 34 ans à quatre pattes

               qui criaient “maman.” Mais les costauds,

La fin, là à Verdun, n’y avait que ces gros bonshommes

               Et y voyaient extrêmement clair.

Qu’est-ce que ça vaut, les généraux, le lieutenant,

on les pèse à un centigramme,

               n’y a rien que du bois,

Notr’ capitaine, tout, tout ce qu’il y a de plus renfermé

               de vieux polytechnicien, mais solide,

La tête solide. Là, vous savez,

Tout, tout fonctionne, et les voleurs, tous les vices,

Mais les rapaces,

               y avait trois dans notre compagnie, tous tués.

Y sortaient fouiller un cadavre, pour rien,

               y n’serainet sortis pour rien que ça.

Et les boches, tout ce que vous voulez,

               militarisme, et cætera, et cætera.

Tout ça, mais, MAIS,

               l’français, i s’bat quand y a mangé.

Mais ces pauvres types

A  la  fin y s’attaquaient pour manger,

               Sans orders, les bêtes sauvages, on y fait

Prisonniers; ceux qui parlaient français disaient:

               “Poo quah? Ma foi on attaquait pour manger.”

 

C’est le corr-ggras, le corps gras,

               leurs trains marchaient trois kilomètres à l’heure,

Et ça criait, ça grincait, on l’entendait à cinq kilomètres.

(Ça qui finit la guerre.)

 

               Liste officielle des morts 5,000,000.

 

I vous dit, bè, voui, tout sentait le pétrole.

Mais, Non! je l’ai engueulé.

Je lui ai dit: T’es un con! T’a raté la guerre.

 

O voui! tous les homes de goût, y conviens,

Tout ça en arrière.

               Mais un mec comme toi!

C’t homme, un type comme ça!

               Ce qu’il aurait pu encaisser!

Il était dans une fabrique.

What, burying squad, terrassiers, avec leur tête

               en arrière, qui regardaient comme ça,

On risquait la vie pour un coup de pelle,

Faut que ça soit bein carré, exact…

 

Dey vus a bolcheviki dere, und dey dease him:

Looka vat youah Trotzsk is done, e iss

               madeh deh zhamefull beace!!

“He iss madeh de zhamefull beace, iss he?

            “He is madeh de zhamevull beace?

“A Brest-Litovsk, yess? Aint yuh herd?

               “He vinneh de vore.

“De droobs iss released vrom de eastern vront, yess?

“Un venn dey getts to deh vestern vront, iss it

               “How many getts dere?

“And dose doat getts dere iss so full off revolutions

“Venn deh vrench is come dhru, yess,

“Dey say, “Vot?” Un de posch say:

               “Aint yeh heard? Say, ve got a rheffolution.”

 

That’s the trick with a crowd,

               Get ‘em into the street and get ‘em moving.

And all the time, there were people going

Down there, over the river.

           

               There was a man there talking,

To a thousand, just a short speech, and

Then move ‘em on.   And he said:

Yes, these people, they are all right, they

Can do everything, everything except act;

And go an’ hear ‘em but when they are through

Come to the bolsheviki…

 

And when it broke, there was the crowd there,

And the cossacks, just as always before,

But one thing, the cossacks said:

               “Pojalouista.”

And that got round in the crowd,

And then a lieutenant of infantry

Ordered ‘em to fire into the crowd,

               in the square at the end of the Nevsky,

In front of the Moscow station,

And they wouldn’t,

And he pulled his sword on a student for laughing,

And killed him,

And a cossack rode out of his squad

On the other side of the square

And cut down the lieutenant of infantry

And there was the revolution…

                as soon as they named it.

 

And you can’t make ‘em,

Nobody knew it was coming. They were all ready, the old gang,

Guns on the top of the post-office and the palace,

But none of the leaders knew it was coming.

 

And there were some killed at the barracks,

But that was between the troops.

 

So we used to hear it at the opera

That they wouldn’t be under Haig;

               and that the advance was beginning;

That it was going to begin in a week.

                       

 

"
"

A Lady asks me

               I speak in season

She seeks reason for an affect, wild often

That is so proud he hath Love for a name

Who denys it can hear the truth now

Wherefore I speak to the present knowers

Having no hope that low-hearted

              Can bring sight to such reason

Be there not natural demonstration

               I have no will to try proof-bringing

Or say where it hath birth

What is its virtu and power

Its being and every moving

Or delight whereby ‘tis called “to love”

Or if man can show it to sight.

 

Where memory liveth,

               it takes its state

Formed like a diafan from light on shade

Which shadow cometh of Mars and remaineth

Created, having a name sensate,

Custom of the soul,

               will from the heart;

Cometh from a seen form which being understood

Taketh locus and remaining in the intellect possible

Wherein hath he neither weight nor still-standing,

Descendeth not by quality but shineth out

Himself his own effect unendingly

Not in delight but in the being aware

Nor can he leave his true likeness otherwhere.

 

He is not vertu but cometh of that perfection

Which is so postulate not by the reason

But ‘tis felt, I say.

Beyond salvation, holdeth his judging force

Deeming intention to be reason’s peer and mate,

Poor in discernment, being thus weakness’ friend

Often his power cometh on death in the end,

Be it withstayed

                and so swinging counterweight.

Not that it were natural opposite, but only

Wry’d a bit from the perfect,

Let no man say love cometh from chance

Or hath not established lordship

Holding his power even though

               Memory hath him no more.

 

Cometh he to be

               when the will

From overplus

Twisteth out of natural measure,

Never adorned with rest Moveth he changing colour

Either to laugh or weep

Contorting the face with fear

               resteth but a little

Yet shall ye see of him That he is most often

With folk who deserve him

And his strange quality sets sighs to move

Willing man look into that forméd trace in his mind

And with such uneasiness as rouseth the flame.

Unskilled can not form his image,

He himself moveth not, drawing all to his stillness,

Neither turneth about to seek his delight

Nor yet to see out proving

Be it so great or so small.

 

He draweth likeness and hue from like nature

So making pleasure more certain in seeming

Nor can stand hid in such nearness,

Beautys be darts tho’ not savage

Skilled from such fear a man follows

Deserving spirit, that pierceth.

Nor is he known from his face

But taken in the white light that is allness

Toucheth his aim

Who heareth, seeth not form

But is led by its emanation

Being divided, set out from colour,

Disjunct in mid darkness

Grazeth the light, one moving by other,

Being divided, divided from all falsity

Worthy of trust

From him alone mercy proceedeth.

 

Go, song, surely thou mayest

Whither it please thee

For so art thou ornate that thy reasons

Shall be praised from thy understanders,

With others hast thou no will to make company.

 

“Called thrones, balascio or topaze”

Eriugina was not understood in his time

“which explains, perhaps, the delay in condemning him”

And they went looking for Manicheans

And found, so far as I can make out, no Manicheans

So they dug for, and damned Scotus Eriugina

“Authority comes from right reason,

                never the other way on”

Hence the delay in condemning him

Aquinas head down in a vacuum,

               Aristotle which way in a vacuum?

Sacrum, sacrum, inluminatio coitu.

Lo Sordels si fo di Mantovana

                of a castle named Goito.

“Five castles!

“Five castles!”

                (king giv’ him five castles)

“And what the hell do I know about dye-works?!”

His Holiness has written a letter:

                “CHARLES the Mangy of Anjou….

..way you treat your men is a scandal….”

Dilectis miles familiaris…castra Montis Odorisii

Montis Sancti Silvestri pallete et pile…

In partibus Thetis….vineland

                                                land tilled

                                                the land incult

                                                pratis nemoribus pascuis

                                                with legal jurisdiction

his heirs of both sexes,

…sold the damn lot six weeks later,

Sordellus de Godio.

                Quan ben m’albir e mon ric pensamen.

"
"

With Usura 

With usura hath no man a house of good stone

each block cut smooth and well fitting

that design might cover their face,

with usura

hath no man a painted paradise on his church wallharpes et luz

or where virgin receiveth message

and halo projects from incision,

with usura

seeth no man Gonzaga his heirs and his concubines

no picture is made to endure nor to live with

but it is made to sell and sell quickly

with usura, sin against nature,

is thy bread ever more of stale rags

is thy bread dry as paper,

with no mountain wheat, no strong flour

with usura the line grows thick

with usura is no clear demarcation

and no man can find site for his dwelling.

Stonecutter is kept from his tone

weaver is kept from his loom

WITH USURA

wool comes not to market

sheep bringeth no gain with usura

Usura is a murrain, usura

blunteth the needle in the maid’s hand

and stoppeth the spinner’s cunning. Pietro Lombardo

came not by usura

Duccio came not by usura

nor Pier della Francesca; Zuan Bellin’ not by usura

nor was ‘La Calunnia’ painted.

Came not by usura Angelico; came not Ambrogio Praedis,

Came no church of cut stone signed: Adamo me fecit.

Not by usura St. Trophime

Not by usura Saint Hilaire,

Usura rusteth the chisel

It rusteth the craft and the craftsman

It gnaweth the thread in the loom

None learneth to weave gold in her pattern;

Azure hath a canker by usura; cramoisi is unbroidered

Emerald findeth no Memling

Usura slayeth the child in the womb

It stayeth the young man’s courting

It hath brought palsey to bed, lyeth

between the young bride and her bridegroom

                               CONTRA NATURAM

They have brought whores for Eleusis

Corpses are set to banquet

at behest of usura.

 

 

 

N.B. Usury: A charge for the use of purchasing power, levied without regard to production; often without regard to the possibilities of production. (Hence the failure of the Medici bank.)

 

            

"
"

Zeus lies in Ceres’ bosom

Taishan is attended of loves

                        under Cythera, before sunrise

And he said: “Hay aquí mucho catolicismo—(sounded

                                                            catolithismo

                      y muy poco reliHion.”

and he said: “Yo creo que los reyes desparecen”

(Kings will, I think, disappear)

This was Padre José Elizondo

                                        in 1906 and in 1917

or about 1917

                and Dolores said: “Come pan, niño,”   eat bread, me lad

Sargent had painted her

                                        before he descended

(i.e. if he descended

                but in those days he did thumb sketches,

impressions of the Velázquez in the Museo del Prado

and books cost a peseta,

                         brass candlesticks in proportion,

hot wind came from the marshes

       and death-chill from the mountains.

And later Bowers wrote: “but such hatred,

       I have never conceived such”

and the London reds wouldn’t show up his friends

                        (i.e. friends of Franco

working in London) and in Alcázar

forty years gone, they said: go back to the station to eat

you can sleep here for a peseta”

               goat bells tinkled all night

               and the hostess grinned: Eso es luto, haw!

mi marido es muerto

                 (it is mourning, my husband is dead)

when she gave me a paper to write on

with a black border half an inch or more deep,

       say 5/8ths, of the locanda

“We call all foreigners frenchies”

and the egg broke in Cabranez’ pocket,

                thus making history. Basil says

they beat drums for three days

till all the drumheads were busted

                 (simple village fiesta)

and as for his life in the Canaries…

Possum observed that the local portagoose folk dance

was danced by the same dancers in divers localities

                in political welcome…

the technique of demonstration

                Cole studied that (not G.D.H., Horace)

“You will find” said old André Spire,

that every man on that board (Crédit Agricole)

has a brother-in-law

                        “You the one, I the few”

                        said John Adams

speaking of fears in the abstract

         to his volatile friend Mr Jefferson.

(To break the pentameter, that was the first heave)

or as Jo Bard says:   they never speak to each other,

if it is baker and concierge visibly

               it is La Rouchefoucauld and de Maintenon audibly.

“Te cavero le budella”

                              “La corata a te”

In less than a geological epoch

                                      said Henry Mencken

“Some cook, some do not cook

       some things cannot be altered”’Iugx.  .  .  .  . ’emòn potí dwma aòn andra

What counts is the cultural level,

        thank Benin for this table ex packing box

        “doan yu tell no one I made it”

                      from a mask fine as any in Frankfurt

“It’ll get you offn th’ groun”

                      Light as the branch of Kuanon

And at first disappointed with shoddy

the bare ram-shackle quais, but then saw the

high buggy wheels

                      and was reconciled,

George Santayana arriving in the port of Boston

and kept to the end of his life that faint thethear

of the Spaniard

                        as grace quasi imperceptible

as did Muss the v for u of Romagna

and said the grief was a full act

              repeated for each new condoleress

working up to a climax.

and George Horace said he wd/ “get Beveridge” (Senator)

Beveridge wouldn’t talk and he wouldn’t write for the papers

but George got him by campin’ in his hotel

and assailin’ him at lunch breakfast an’ dinner

                        three articles

and my ole man went on hoein’ corn

       while George was a-tellin’ him,

come across a vacant lot

                where you’d occasionally see a wild rabbit

or mebbe only a loose one

            AOI!

            a leaf in the current

                                           at my grates no Althea______libretto______ 

Yet

Ere the season died a-cold

Borne upon a zephyr’s shoulder

I rose through the aureate sky

                               Lawes and Jenkyns guard thy rest                               Dolmetsch ever be thy guest,

Has he tempered the viol’s wood

To enforce   both the grave   and the acute?

Has he curved us the bowl of the lute?

                               Lawes and Jenkyns guard thy rest                               Dolmetsch ever be thy guest

Hast ’ou fashioned so airy a mood

       To draw up leaf from the root?

Hast ’ou found   a cloud   so light

        As seemed neither mist nor shade?

           

                                Then resolve me, tell me aright

                                 If Waller sang or Dowland played

           

                   Your eyen two wol sleye me sodenly

                    I may the beauté of hem nat susteyne

 

And for 180 years almost nothing.

 

Ed ascoltando al leggier mormorio

        there came new subtlety of eyes into my tent,

whether of the spirit or hypostasis,

            but what the blindfold hides

or at carneval

                                  nor any pair showed anger

            Saw but the eyes and stance between the eyes,

colour, diastasis,

      careless or unaware it had not the

   whole tent’s room

nor was place for the full EidwV

interpass, penetrate

      casting but shade beyond the other lights

              sky’s clear

              night’s sea

              green of the mountain pool

              shone from the unmasked eyes in half-mask’s space.

What thou lovest well remains,

                                                  the rest is dross

What thou lov’st well shall not be reft from thee

What thou lov’st well is thy true heritage

Whose world, or mine or theirs

                                            or is it of none?

First came the seen, then thus the palpable

        Elysium, though it were in the halls of hell,

What thou lovest well is thy true heritage

What thou lov’st well shall not be reft from thee

 

The ant’s a centaur in his dragon world.

Pull down thy vanity, it is not man

Made courage, or made order, or made grace,

         Pull down thy vanity, I say pull down.

Learn of the green world what can be thy place

In scaled invention or true artistry,

Pull down thy vanity,

                                        Paquin pull down!

The green casque has outdone your elegance.

 

“Master thyself, then others shall thee beare”

       Pull down thy vanity

Thou art a beaten dog beneath the hail,

A swollen magpie in a fitful sun,

Half black half white

Nor knowst’ou wing from tail

Pull down thy vanity

                        How mean thy hates

Fostered in falsity,

                        Pull down thy vanity,

Rathe to destroy, niggard in charity,

Pull down thy vanity,

                       I say pull down.

 

But to have done instead of not doing

                     this is not vanity

To have, with decency, knocked

That a Blunt should open

               To have gathered from the air a live tradition

or from a fine old eye the unconquered flame

This is not vanity.

         Here error is all in the not done,

all in the diffidence that faltered  .  .  .

 

"
"

The scientists are in terror

            and the European mind stops

Wyndham Lewis chose blindness

            rather than have his mind stop.

Night under wind mid garofani,

            the petals are almost still

Mozart, Linnaeus, Sulmona,

When one’s friends hate each other

            how can there be peace in the world?

Their asperities diverted me in my green time.

A blown husk that is finished

            but the light sings eternal

a pale flare over marshes

                where the salt hay whispers to tide’s change

Time, space,

          neither life nor death is the answer.

And of man seeking good,

            doing evil.

In meiner Heimat

                   where the dead walked

                              and the living were made of cardboard.

"
"

On the volatile nights of a winter

nature corroborates with magnanimity

a Cuban is in training for amusement or amnesia,

so often and unfairly assumed as the same,

he brings candy to God, he cultivates the vernacular, he fights off

cirrhosis with fruit poached in syrup, he conducts business;

thus research has shown that The Cuban is resourceful.

In the weighty choreographies of a summer

nature authorizes already with suspicion

a Cuban meets the ocean with offerings and harpoons,

so often and unfairly assumed as the same,

he finger-counts the casualties, he commits an infraction

he slides his hands into his pockets, he avows and commits;

thus analysis has shown that The Cuban is inspired.

Let’s attend the improbable territory

where with pasty mouths a Cuban and The Cuban engage in virile

conversation

we will learn there by what voyage, by what strange condition

by what exchange

we fall prey to so much ingenuity.

"
"

You, functional space

variants in voltage, the only light

Transitory effect of Love

several different lights

Sustain

Sustain them

you sustain them.

"
"

One fisherman alongside the other

one seagull alongside the other

seagulls over the fishermen.

 

"
"

When one isn’t enough, you need two

when two aren’t enough, you need four

with four the progression begins, moving toward a number

that schoolteachers will call absurd.

Question: How many men do you need

to put up a house?

Answer: You need absurd men

when one isn’t enough and two can’t do

the work of One.

And how much money should we give these men

to compensate them?

You need absurd coins when one coin

sliced in half and handed out

isn’t enough.

And how many words do you need to

       transform them?

Absurd and absurd and absurd words

when silence isn’t enough.

This is what they call progression:

Absurd men aren’t enough for putting up the house,

absurd coins don’t make them happy

absurd words can’t dissuade them.

 

 

"
"

I lie here thinking of you:—   the stain of love  is upon the world! Yellow, yellow, yellow it eats into the leaves, smears with saffron the horned branches that lean heavily against a smooth purple sky! There is no light only a honey-thick stain that drips from leaf to leaf and limb to limb spoiling the colors of the whole world—   you far off there under the wine-red selvage of the west! 

"
"

With what stillness at last

you appear in the valley

your first sunlight reaching down

to touch the tips of a few

high leaves that do not stir

as though they had not noticed

and did not know you at all

then the voice of a dove calls

from far away in itself

to the hush of the morning

so this is the sound of you

here and now whether or not

anyone hears it this is

where we have come with our age

our knowledge such as it is

and our hopes such as they are

invisible before us

untouched and still possible

"
"

How can we believe he did it— every day—for all those years?We remember how the musicians gathered for him—and the prostitutesarranged themselves the way he wanted— and even the helmeted monkeyswith their little toy car cerebella— posed—and the fish on the plate—remained after he ate the fish— Bones—What do we do with thislife?—except announce: Joy. Joy. Joy—from the lead—to the oil—to the stretch of bright canvas—stretched—to the end of it all.

"
"

Wednesday, August 02, 2006


 






8 a.m. 


--Mom is wearing a Kailua Surfriders Staff teeshirt this morning. That must be Bryant’s old shirt. No, she insists, it’s an Iowa teeshirt. The young man down the street, the one she’s never met, gave her an Iowa teeshirt when he heard she’d gone to Iowa. It’s Iowa.


--I didn’t know she was coming today.


--She was sweet at 4 a.m., Bryant says. They had the first conversation about the shirt then.


--Israel sends more ground troops into Lebanon. There’s an opportunity there, we read in the Washington Post.


--I don’t like you. I don’t like them. I don’t like them either. And Susan? She laughs.


--Compare and contrast the acquisition of a language to its loss. Avoid the trap of merely saying that the latter happens in reverse order of the former. You are likely to do better if you see them as similar processes, though one leads to gain, the other loss. Think chemistry. Think performance of a script. Think Harold and the Purple Crayon. Think Harold Pinter.


--Think two old men fishing for a beautiful young woman in a lake. Think one of them might get “lucky.”


--When are you leaving? Where are you going? Are you taking the kids?


--Sangha and May hatch plots of their own. Go quiet when I arrive. In this life, you either make plots or have them hatched around you. Like eggs. Like poisoned ones.


posted by Susan at 6:46 AM 0 comments

"
"

The butterfly was there

before any human art was made.

Before cathedrals rose in prayer,

the butterfly was there.

Before pyramids pierced the air

or Great Wall stones were laid,

the butterfly was there.

Before any human, art was made.

"
"

It’s like I thought it would be.

Absolute silence.

Just me and my poem.

But,

as I stand onstage

preparing to start,

I realize the audience is quiet

because they want to hear me.

Silence isn’t scary.

It’s like Mr. Carey said,

silence is my chance.

And so I speak,

slowly

and clearly,

and I don’t see

the faces in front of me.

I see the images of my poem,

and I think only of what I’m saying

and how much it means to me.

My voice grows stronger

and I don’t have to struggle

to remember the words.

 

I know them

because I wrote them.

"
"

Night is deep in a dark box

deep in a cushion of down

nestled in tissue

tied with ribbons

Night is asleep in the dark

 

Night wakes with curious paws

wakes in a furry fog

wrestles the tissue

nibbles the ribbons

Night is awake in the dark

 

Night tumbles in velvet directions

tumbles along to your bed

sniffing your wishes

wagging your worries

Night is a friend in the dark

"
"

One container of spaghetti sauce

Grandma made before she died.

Two old pieces of wedding cake

you couldn’t pay me to eat.

Three snowballs from last winter

slightly deformed, no longer fluffy.

Four small flounder from the time

Grandpa took me deep-sea fishing.

Everything coated with a thick

white layer of sadness.

"
"

Will my ears grow long as Grandpa's?

What makes us look like kin?

Tell me where'd I get long eyelashes

and where'd I get my chin?

 

Where'd I get my ice cream sweet tooth

and this nose that wiggles when I talk?

Where's I get my dizzy daydreams

and my foot-rolling, side-step walk?

Did I inherit my sense of humor

and these crooked, ugly toes?

What if I balloon like Uncle Harry

and have to shave my nose?

 

How long after I start growing

until I start to shrink?

Am I going to lose my teeth,

some day?

My hair?

My mind?

 

Do you think

I'll be tall or short or thin

or bursting at the seams?

Am I naturally this crazy?

Is it something in my genes?

 

I'm more than

who I am,

I'm also

who I'm from.

It's a scary speculation--   

Who will I become?

"
"

My foot’s

asleep,

my seat

is sore.

You said

“another hour”

before.

You say

“an hour”

every

time.

Your

hours

are much

longer

than

mine.

"
"

Oh, how the wind howls,

howls the blossoms from the boughs;

 

Oh how the boughs bend,

bend and willow to the ground;

 

Oh, how the ground wells,

wells with blossoms blown to hills;

 

Oh, how the hills sound,

sound a whisper pink and loud.

"
"

In their yellow-most goings,

leaves of maple

ride breezes to the ground.

You can hear their sound

each autumn afternoon

as the crisp air cuts

through the trees

and hurries us along

the golden sidewalks

home.

 

"
"

It was a good idea, cutting awaythe vines and ivy, trimming back the chest-high thicket lazy years had let grow here. Though it wasn’t for lackof love for the trees, I’d like to point out. Years love trees in a way we can’t imagine. They just don’t use the fruit like us; they want instead the slantof sun through narrow branches, the buckshot of rain on these old cherries. And we, now that I think on it, want those things too, we just always and desperatelywant the sugar of the fruit, the best we’ll get from this irascible land: sweetness we can gather for years, new stains staining the stains on our hands.

"
"

For part of one strange year we lived in a small house at the edge of a wood. No neighbors, which suited us. Nobody to ask questions. Except for the one big question we went on asking ourselves.                         That spring myriads of birds stopped overbriefly. Birds we’d never seen before, drawn to our leafy quiet and our brook and because, as we later learned, the place lay beneath a flyway. Flocks appeared overnight—birds brilliant or dull, with sharp beaksor crossed bills, birds small and enormous, all of them pausing to gorge at the feeder, to rest their wings, and disappear. Each flock seemed surer than we of a destination. By the time we’d watched them wing north in spring, then make an anxious autumn return, we too had pulled it together and we too moved into what seemed to be our lives.

"
"

I   Said the Duck to the Kangaroo,     ‘Good gracious! how you hop! Over the fields and the water too,     As if you never would stop! My life is a bore in this nasty pond, And I long to go out in the world beyond!     I wish I could hop like you!’     Said the Duck to the Kangaroo.     II   ‘Please give me a ride on your back!’     Said the Duck to the Kangaroo. ‘I would sit quite still, and say nothing but “Quack,”     The whole of the long day through! And we’d go to the Dee, and the Jelly Bo Lee, Over the land, and over the sea;—     Please take me a ride! O do!’     Said the Duck to the Kangaroo.     III   Said the Kangaroo to the Duck,     ‘This requires some little reflection; Perhaps on the whole it might bring me luck,     And there seems but one objection, Which is, if you’ll let me speak so bold, Your feet are unpleasantly wet and cold, And would probably give me the roo-     Matiz!’ said the Kangaroo.    IV   Said the Duck, ‘As I sate on the rocks,     I have thought over that completely, And I bought four pairs of worsted socks     Which fit my web-feet neatly. And to keep out the cold I’ve bought a cloak, And every day a cigar I’ll smoke,     All to follow my own dear true     Love of a Kangaroo!’     V Said the Kangaroo, ‘I’m ready!     All in the moonlight pale; But to balance me well, dear Duck, sit steady!     And quite at the end of my tail!’ So away they went with a hop and a bound, And they hopped the whole world three times round;     And who so happy,—O who,     As the Duck and the Kangaroo?.

"
"

I   They went to sea in a Sieve, they did,    In a Sieve they went to sea: In spite of all their friends could say, On a winter’s morn, on a stormy day,    In a Sieve they went to sea! And when the Sieve turned round and round, And every one cried, ‘You’ll all be drowned!’ They called aloud, ‘Our Sieve ain’t big, But we don’t care a button! we don’t care a fig!    In a Sieve we’ll go to sea!’       Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;       Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.     II   They sailed away in a Sieve, they did,    In a Sieve they sailed so fast, With only a beautiful pea-green veil Tied with a riband by way of a sail,    To a small tobacco-pipe mast; And every one said, who saw them go, ‘O won’t they be soon upset, you know! For the sky is dark, and the voyage is long, And happen what may, it’s extremely wrong    In a Sieve to sail so fast!’       Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;       Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.     III   The water it soon came in, it did,    The water it soon came in; So to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet In a pinky paper all folded neat,    And they fastened it down with a pin. And they passed the night in a crockery-jar, And each of them said, ‘How wise we are! Though the sky be dark, and the voyage be long, Yet we never can think we were rash or wrong,    While round in our Sieve we spin!’       Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;       Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.     IV   And all night long they sailed away;    And when the sun went down, They whistled and warbled a moony song To the echoing sound of a coppery gong,    In the shade of the mountains brown. ‘O Timballo! How happy we are, When we live in a sieve and a crockery-jar, And all night long in the moonlight pale, We sail away with a pea-green sail,    In the shade of the mountains brown!’      Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;      Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.     V   They sailed to the Western Sea, they did,    To a land all covered with trees, And they bought an Owl, and a useful Cart, And a pound of Rice, and a Cranberry Tart,    And a hive of silvery Bees. And they bought a Pig, and some green Jack-daws, And a lovely Monkey with lollipop paws, And forty bottles of Ring-Bo-Ree,    And no end of Stilton Cheese.       Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;       Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.     VI   And in twenty years they all came back,    In twenty years or more, And every one said, ‘How tall they’ve grown!’ For they’ve been to the Lakes, and the Torrible Zone,    And the hills of the Chankly Bore; And they drank their health, and gave them a feast Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast; And everyone said, ‘If we only live, We too will go to sea in a Sieve,—    To the hills of the Chankly Bore!’       Far and few, far and few,          Are the lands where the Jumblies live;       Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,          And they went to sea in a Sieve.                

"
"

Mudman in earth cafeteria,

I eat aardwolf. I eat ant bear.

I eat mimosa, platypus, ermine.

 

“White meat is tasteless, dark meat stinks.”

(The other white meat is pork, triple X.)

 

Rice people vs. bread people.

White bread vs. wheat bread.

White rice vs. brown rice.

Manhattan vs. New England.

Kosher sub-gum vs. knuckle kabob.

 

“What is patriotism but love of the foods one had as a child?”*

 

To eat stinky food

is a sign of savagery, humility,

identification with the earth.

 

“It was believed that after cleaning, tripe still contained ten percent

excrement which was therefore eaten with the rest of the meal.”**

 

Today I’ll eat Colby cheese.

Tomorrow I’ll eat sparrows.

Chew bones, suck fat,

bite heads off, gnaw on a broken wing.

 

Anise-flavored beef soup smells like sweat.

A large sweaty head bent over

a large bowl of sweat soup.

 

A Pekinese is ideal, will feed six,

but an unscrupulous butcher

will fudge a German sheperd,

chopping it up to look like a Pekinese.

 

Toothless man sucking

a pureed porterhouse steak

with a straw.

 

Parboiled placenta.

 

To skewer and burn meat is barbaric.

To boil, requiring a vessel, is a step up.

To microwave.

 

People who eat phalli, hot dogs, kielbasas

vs. people who eat balls.

 

To eat with a three-pronged spear and a knife.

To eat with two wooden sticks.

To eat with the hands.

 

Boiling vs. broiling.

 

To snack on a tub of roasted grasshoppers at the movies.

 

 

 

*Lin Yutang

**Mikhail Bakhtin

"
"

A stick of carrot is equal to a gillyflower.

A gillyflower is equal to a drum of gasoline.

A drum of gasoline is equal to a stick of carrot.

“For the sake of my offspring, I think I’ll marry an outsider.”

 

Tamerlane has been sighted in Northern Italy.

Jesus has broken out in Inner Mongolia.

They like to kiss outside and piss inside.

We like to kiss inside and piss outside.

 

A mosquito has a mouth but no asshole.

After three drops of blood, he falls asleep.

He only gets up to bite another mosquito.

He sucks and he sucks.

Inside this balloon are ten thousand mosquitoes.

 

In my left fist is a fossil of the first butterfly.

In my right fist is a theory of why blood trickles down men’s legs. 

 

A man gains a drop of blood per day from eating.

Each night, he gets up to slash himself

Across the face and wrist.

He must be bitten by ten thousand mosquitoes.

He sucks and he sucks.

Where would all that blood go otherwise?

 

Once a month, a woman drops a teacup on the floor,

A fine teacup with bones inside it.

 

Vietnamese and Germans now speak the same language.

Prussians and Bavarians cannot understand each other.

"
"

The mind is a hotel with a thousand rooms. When I tilt my head a certain way, I think about certain things. When I tilt my head another way, I think about other things. If I sleep on the right side of my face, for example, I’d dream of a pale rose, the future, or a continental diner in Passaic, New Jersey. When I sleep on the left side of my face, I’d dream that a hand is squeezing my heart, that I’m in prison, or that I’m watching hockey at an airport bar, about to miss a flight.

"
"

there is ghazal swimming inside of her, wanting to be born. on the matter of foretelling, of small miracles, cactus flowers in bloom on this city fire escape, where inside your tongue touches every inch of her skin, where you lay your hand on her belly and sleep. here, she fingers the ornate remains of ancient mosques. here, some mythic angel will rise from the dust of ancestors’ bones. this is where you shall worship, at the intersections of distilled deities and memory’s sharp edges. the country is quite a poetic place; water and rock contain verse and metaphor, even wild grasses reply in rhyme. you are not broken. she knows this having captured a moment of lucidity; summer lightning bugs, sun’s rays in a jelly jar.


 


this is not a love poem, but a cove to escape the flux, however momentary. she is still a child, confabulating the fantastic; please do not erode her wonder for the liquid that is your language. there is thunderstorm in her chest, wanting to burst through her skin. this is neither love poem nor plea. this is not river, nor stone.


 


 


 


 

"
"







pilipinas to petatlán







she whispers desert trees, thorn-ridged, trickling yellow candles; roots spilling snakes’ blood

virgin of ribboned silk; virgin of gold filigree

one day’s walk westward, a crucifix of fisherman’s dinghy dimensions washes ashore

virgin adorned in robe of shark embryo and coconut husk

she fingers mollusks, wraps herself in sea vines

virgin of ocean voyage peril

she will herself born

virgin of mud brick ruins; virgin of sandstorm echoes

she is saint of commonplaces; saint of badlands

virgin of jade, camphor, porcelain; virgin of barter for ghosts

penitents, earthdivers of forgotten names praying skyward

virgin of scars blossomed from open veins of fire

she slips across the pacific’s rivers of pearldiving children

virgin of copper coins

she is bloodletting words, painting unlikeness

virgin of anachronism

children stained with berries and rust, their skeletons bend, arrow-tipped; smoke blurs eyes’ edges

virgin of mineral depletion; virgin of mercury

at other altitudes she remembers to breathe; a monument scraping cloud

virgin of tin deposits extracted from mountains

these are not divinations; there is goldleaf about her skin

virgin of naming and renaming places in between

"
"

she wasn’t born in this city. she found its basalt greenstone chunks, seafloor forced skyward. it found her hands through mist and odors whirring pigeons’ clubfeet fluttering, toothless men’s paper sacks spilling elixirs, roots, shark fin tonics. heat swelling sewer steam rising, side street chess match maneuvers mystifying. it sought her whirlwind hair, grown seavine thick. songbird, adrift, nestling neon, she crafted snares for moths, butterflies, treasure hunting children tracing ideographs: sky, sun. patina spires, smirking dragon boys humming silk lanterns, flight of phoenixes through fish vendors’ stalls, corrugated plastic blackbird perches, jade-ringed gardens, needle-tipped shanties. it bulleted trees, lighting hash pipes; herbalists’ storefront canopies concealing leathered men, versed in languages of whiskered ghosts. it invented her dialect carving tongue: salt fables, yellow caution tape palaces. she lost herself in this city. it lured her, drank her air; honey voice’s precision, hybrid beyond memory. songbird, adrift, this city’s misplaced siren. migration patterns subterranean streams swallowed whole.

"
"

you dream in the language of dodging bullets and artillery fire.

new, sexy diagnoses have been added to the lexicon on your behalf

(“charlie don’t surf,” has also been added to the lexicon on your behalf).

in this home that is not our home, we have mutually exiled each

other. i walk down your street in the rain, and i do not call you. i

walk in the opposite direction of where i know to find you. that we

do not speak is louder than bombs.

 

there are times that missing you is a matter of procedure. now is

not one of those times. there are times when missing you hurts. so

it comes to this, vying for geography. there is a prayer stuck in my

throat. douse me in gasoline, my love, and strike a match. let’s see

this prayer ignite to high heaven.

 

"
"

From golden showers of the ancient skies,

On the first day, and the eternal snow of stars,

You once unfastened giant calyxes

For the young earth still innocent of scars:

 

Young gladioli with the necks of swans,

Laurels divine, of exiled souls the dream,

Vermilion as the modesty of dawns

Trod by the footsteps of the seraphim;

 

The hyacinth, the myrtle gleaming bright,

And, like the flesh of woman, the cruel rose,

Hérodiade blooming in the garden light,

She that from wild and radiant blood arose!

 

And made the sobbing whiteness of the lily

That skims a sea of sighs, and as it wends

Through the blue incense of horizons, palely

Toward the weeping moon in dreams ascends!

 

Hosanna on the lute and in the censers,

Lady, and of our purgatorial groves!

Through heavenly evenings let the echoes answer,

Sparkling haloes, glances of rapturous love!

 

Mother, who in your strong and righteous bosom,

Formed calyxes balancing the future flask,

Capacious flowers with the deadly balsam

For the weary poet withering on the husk.

"
"



I. ANCIENT OVERTURE OF HÉ﻿RODIADE

 

The Nurse

 (Incantation)

 

Abolished, and her frightful wing in the tears

Of the basin, abolished, that mirrors forth our fears,

The naked golds lashing the crimson space,

An Aurora—heraldic plumage—has chosen to embrace

Our cinerary tower of sacrifice,

Heavy tomb that a songbird has fled, lone caprice

Of a dawn vainly decked out in ebony plumes…

Ah, mansion this sad, fallen country assumes!

No splashing! the gloomy water, standing still,

No longer visited by snowy quill

Or fabled swan, reflects the bereaving

Of autumn extinguished by its own unleaving,

Of the swan when amidst the cold white tomb

Of its feathers, it buried its head, undone

By the pure diamond of a star, but one

Of long ago, which never even shone.

 

Crime! torture! ancient dawn! bright pyre!

Empurpled sky, complicit in the mire,

And stained-glass windows opening red on carnage.

 

The strange chamber, framed in all the baggage

Of a warlike age, its goldwork dull and faint,

Has yesteryear’s snows instead of its ancient tint;

And its pearl-gray tapestry, useless creases

With the buried eyes of prophetesses

Offering Magi withered fingers. One,

With floral past enwoven on my gown

Bleached in an ivory chest and with a sky

Bestrewn with birds amidst the embroidery

Of tarnished silver, seems a phantom risen,

An aroma, roses, rising from the hidden

Couch, now void, the snuffed-out candle shrouds,

An aroma, over the sachet, of frozen golds,

A drift of flowers unfaithful to the moon

(Though the taper’s quenched, petals still fall from one),

Flowers whose long regrets and stems appear

Drenched in a lonely vase to languish there…

An Aurora dragged her wings in the basin’s tears!

 

Magical shadow with symbolic powers!

A voice from the distant past, an evocation,

Is it not mine prepared for incantation?

In the yellow folds of thought, still unexhumed,

Lingering, and like an antique cloth perfumed,

Spread on a pile of monstrances grown cold,

Through ancient hollows and through stiffened folds

Pierced in the rhythm of the pure lace shroud

Through which the old veiled brightness is allowed

To mount, in desperation, shall arise

(But oh, the distance hidden in those cries!)

The old veiled brightness of a strange gilt-silver,

Of the languishing voice, estranged and unfamiliar:

Will it scatter its gold in an ultimate splendor,

And, in the hour of its agony, render

Itself as the anthem for psalms of petition?

For all are alike in being brought to perdition

By the power of old silence and deepening gloom,

Fated, monotonous, vanquished, undone,

Like the sluggish waters of an ancient pond.

 

Sometimes she sang an incoherent song.

Lamentable sign!

                             the bed of vellum sheets,

Useless and closed–not linen!—vainly waits,

Bereft now of the cherished grammary

That spelled the figured folds of reverie,

The silken tent that harbored memory,

The fragrance of sleeping hair. Were these its treasure?

Cold child, she held within her subtle pleasure,

Shivering with flowers in her walks at dawn,

Or when the pomegranate’s flesh is torn

By wicked night! Alone, the crescent moon

On the iron clockface is a pendulum

Suspending Lucifer: the clepsydra pours

Dark drops in grief upon the stricken hours

As, wounded, each one wanders a dim shade

On undeciphered paths without a guide!

All this the king knows not, whose salary

Has fed so long this agèd breast now dry.

Her father knows it no more than the cruel

Glacier mirroring his arms of steel,

When sprawled on a pile of corpses without coffins

Smelling obscurely of resin, he deafens

With dark silver trumpets the ancient pines!

Will he ever come back from the Cisalpines?

Soon enough! for all is bad dream and foreboding!

On the fingernail raised in the stained glass, according

To the memory of the trumpets, the old sky burns,

And to an envious candle it turns

A finger. And soon, when the sad sun sinks,

It shall pierce through the body of wax till it shrinks!

No sunset, but the red awakening

Of the last day concluding everything

Struggles so sadly that time disappears,

The redness of apocalypse, whose tears

Fall on the child, exiled to her own proud

Heart, as the swan makes its plumage a shroud

For its eyes, the old swan, and is carried away

From the plumage of grief to the eternal highway

Of its hopes, where it looks on the diamonds divine

Of a moribund star, which never more shall shine!

"
"

The buried temple empties through its bowels, Sepulchral sewer spewing mud and rubies, Abominably some idol of Anubis, Its muzzle all aflame with savage howls.   Or if the recent gas the wick befouls That bears so many insults, it illumines In haggard outline an immortal pubis Flying along the streetlights on its prowls.   What wreaths dried out in cities without prayer Of night could bless like that which settles down Vainly against the marble of Baudelaire   In the fluttering veil that girds her absence round, A tutelary poison, his own Wraith, We breathe in always though it bring us death.      

"
"

Yesterday I found my pipe while pondering a long evening of work, of fine winter work. Thrown aside were my cigarettes, with all the childish joys of summer, into the past which the leaves shining blue in the sun, the muslins, illuminate, and taken up once again was the grave pipe of a serious man who wants to smoke for a long while without being disturbed, so as better to work: but I was not prepared for the surprise that this abandoned object had in store for me; for hardly had I drawn the first puff when I forgot the grand books I was planning to write, and, amazed, moved to a feeling of tenderness, I breathed in the air of the previous winter which was now coming back to me. I had not been in contact with my faithful sweetheart since returning to France, and now all of London, London as I had lived it a year ago entirely alone, appeared before my eyes: first the dear fogs that muffle one’s brains and have an odor of their own there when they penetrate beneath the casements. My tobacco had the scent of a somber room with leather furniture sprinkled by coal dust, on which the thin black cat would curl and stretch; the big fires! and the maid with red arms pouring coals, and the noise of those coals falling from the sheet-iron bucket into the iron scuttle in the morning—when the postman gave the solemn double knock that kept me alive! Once again I saw through the windows those sickly trees of the deserted square—I saw the open sea, crossed so often that winter, shivering on the deck of the steamer wet with drizzle and blackened from the fumes—with my poor wandering beloved, decked out in traveller’s clothes, a long dress, dull as the dust of the roads, a coat clinging damply to her cold shoulders, one of those straw hats with no feather and hardly any ribbons that wealthy ladies throw away upon arrival, mangled as they are by the sea, and that poor loved ones refurbish for many another season. Around her neck was wound the terrible handkerchief that one waves when saying goodbye forever.

"
"

In the muddy maze of some old neighborhood,Often, where the street lamp gleams like blood,As the wind whips the flame, rattles the glass,Where human beings ferment in a stormy mass,One sees a ragpicker knocking against the walls,Paying no heed to the spies of the cops, his thralls,But stumbling like a poet lost in dreams;He pours his heart out in stupendous schemes.He takes great oaths and dictates sublime laws,Casts down the wicked, aids the victims' cause;Beneath the sky, like a vast canopy,He is drunken of his splendid qualities.Yes, these people, plagued by household cares,Bruised by hard work, tormented by their years,Each bent double by the junk he carries,The jumbled vomit of enormous Paris,—They come back, perfumed with the smell of staleWine-barrels, followed by old comrades, paleFrom war, mustaches like limp flags, to marchWith banners, flowers, through the triumphal archErected for them, by some magic touch!And in the dazzling, deafening debauchOf bugles, sunlight, of huzzas and drum,Bring glory to the love-drunk folks at home!Even so, wine pours its gold to frivolousHumanity, a shining Pactolus;Then through man's throat of high exploits it singsAnd by its gifts reigns like authentic kings.To lull these wretches' sloth and drown the hateOf all who mutely die, compassionate,God has created sleep's oblivion;Man added Wine, divine child of the Sun.

"
"

At my side the Demon writhes forever,Swimming around me like impalpable air;As I breathe, he burns my lungs like feverAnd fills me with an eternal guilty desire.Knowing my love of Art, he snares my senses,Apearing in woman's most seductive forms,And, under the sneak's plausible pretenses,Lips grow accustomed to his lewd love-charms.He leads me thus, far from the sight of God,Panting and broken with fatigue intoThe wilderness of Ennui, deserted and broad,And into my bewildered eyes he throwsVisions of festering wounds and filthy clothes,And all Destruction's bloody retinue.

"
"

ISaid the Table to the Chair,'You can hardly be aware,'How I suffer from the heat,'And from chilblains on my feet!'If we took a little walk,'We might have a little talk!'Pray let us take the air!'Said the Table to the Chair.IISaid the Chair unto the Table,'Now you know we are not able!'How foolishly you talk,'When you know we cannot walk!'Said the Table, with a sigh,'It can do no harm to try,'I've as many legs as you,'Why can't we walk on two?'IIISo they both went slowly down,And walked about the townWith a cheerful bumpy sound,As they toddled round and round.And everybody cried,As they hastened to their side,'See! the Table and the Chair'Have come out to take the air!'IVBut in going down an alley,To a castle in a valley,They completely lost their way,And wandered all the day,Till, to see them safely back,They paid a Ducky-quack,And a Beetle, and a Mouse,Who took them to their house.VThen they whispered to each other,'O delightful little brother!'What a lovely walk we've taken!'Let us dine on Beans and Bacon!'So the Ducky, and the leetleBrowny-Mousy and the BeetleDined, and danced upon their headsTill they toddled to their beds.

"
"

Tune yr sandwich to the key of C

Make biscuits in kitchen B

 

Miss Scarlet with her lead pipe

Waits behind the cupboard door

 

Clubs one from the other limp

Only to begin again innocent

 

& nothing to do but gather into

Legion gather into constellation

 

Coming along then a spider its web

Holds the walls together holds the floor

 

Up gathers toward a central point

Mean & distribution derivation

 

To insert a thumb & see what sticks

Past the earth’s crust cirrus

 

And acidic enough to spoon fork but

Chew & eat & swallow digesting the fact

 

That nine wonders hope the clouds have

Answers hope the clouds have

"
"

A chicken soup for the rainbow lover’s soul.

A chicken soup for the lover of chicken soup.

A carnage of birds, a devastation.

Chicken soup for the dried-up garden—

It’s been a lousy summer sucking us dry.

Chicken soup for the grocery list.

Chicken soup for unwanted potatoes.

Chicken soup for extinct animals.

 

In the west, the sun sets upon chicken soup.

With or without noodles or rice or barley,

Or vegetables—canned or otherwise—

Carrots and celery or egg drop chicken soup—

Chicken eggs, of course—or the alphabet

Or chili sauce. Chicken soup for chili lovers,

For the spicy soul. Chicken butchered

& boiled specifically for your cold.

A chicken soup for the cold soul,

A chicken soup for the sole of your shoe.

 

A chicken soup for decision making:

Does she love me?  Or love me not?

Knots tied with chicken soup.

Chicken soup tied and sold in knots.

38 ways to tie your soup, to be tied.

Chicken soup for the protection of others.

 

A prayer to chicken soup, may it bring me

A winning lottery ticket. Chicken soup

For recovering alcoholics who still

Need hydration. A hydrangea’s

Chicken soup—to be loved like no other.

 

A chicken soup for Barry Bonds—

May he break Hank Aaron’s record.

Stick a pin in the chicken soup & bet

On its opponent. 30-Love. Match point.

A chicken soup for winners.

A chicken soup for losers.

Chicken soup for those who tie or draw.

The 60-plus occupations of soup.

Chicken for Sue, born in the year

Of the snake. The snake that ate

An alligator and died. They both died.

 

A chicken soup for the one who is eaten.

A chicken soup for the one who eats

Things other than chicken soup.

Transcending the bowl. A meta-bowl

Chicken soup for the transcended bowl.

Chicken soup for the transcending soup.

Chicken soup for the Marxist, steering

Away from values associated with heirarchies.

Chicken soup for the mud wrestler,

The roller derby queen. Chicken soup

For dairy queen, for the queen of hearts,

 

For Lady Di and the paparazzi,

For clean and dirty kings and queens.

For kiwis with wings, for the royal

Food pyramid. Chicken soup in

January, it’s so nice

To slip upon the sliding ice.

 

  

 

"
"

1.  Mary-Frances applied continual pressure on me to start

      the job and helped in recording and editing.

2.  Thanks to Sandra for her heroic typing, although this

      need not be taken to indicate her agreement with

      various points.

3.  Peter provided information about the notorious

      perpetual pills.

4.  As someone who gloried in seeing dogma overturned,

     he would have delighted in the irony of seeing

     arguments for the reverse.

5.  And without their willingness to take on the chore of

     responding to our whims and fancies over a 3-year

     period, this book would have fallen short of its goals.

6.  The production of this tome would have been

     unthinkable without the marvelous electronic tools that

     are now widely available.

7.  However, Chapter 7 was written in a relatively self-

     contained fashion, so the serious student may skip

     Chapter 6 and delve directly into the theory.

8. The late abbess of Shasta Abbey proved that looking

     through different windows into the same room is not a

     metaphor.

9.  Nick, who is writing a book on oxygen, gave much 

     appreciated data concerning that element.

10. The filmstrip format employed in Chapter 10 originated

       with Elizabeth.

11.  I have been very fortunate in being able to use such

        penetrating minds.

12.  In recent months, I have often felt like a small child in a

       sweet shop as astronomers all round the world have sent

       me the most mouthwatering new data.

13.  Suffice it at this point to observe that I am not just talking 

       about wallpaper patterns on shirts and dresses, although

       many of these patterns do turn out to have interesting 

       properties.

14.  I do not expect that many readers will want to be 

       masochistic enough to want to read the book in order 

       from cover to cover.

"
"

I have a hard time making my mind take place.

Every input adjusts the chemistry—water, peppermint stick, analogue.

Kisses are circles. With eyes closed, every taste buds almond orange.

 

Ceiling defines the segment; door, the vector. Exits & entrances.

My location’s ribcage is beneath the changing spectrum’s breast.

Heft of a wet peony, white & pink, drips its honey south.

 

Conducted back, your body accelerates—biology of a taxi ride.

Kept kempt, migraines at bay, tidy nails, & sneezes away.

Sex through collisions—bridges jumped & limbs tangled.

 

Or the chromatic staff arranging the spheres’ accidental spills.

Frets & intonations strung across a tempered series of knots,

Strung through the loops of our virtual displacement.

 

But it isn’t wings or hooks or hooves or horns or see-through or white.

Whether afloat in a boat or aloft in a plane. The way maps affect time.

For a second I think I feel the fleeting texture of your skin.

 

Lumbar & sacral nerves descend to exits beyond the end of the cord.

Keep the blood in at all costs, even when the wind crackles its cells.

The coming of electricity, half next time & half this:

My five. My unending ache at the absence of you.

 

"
"

She wants a house full of cups and the ghosts

of last century’s lesbians; I want a spotless

apartment, a fast computer.  She wants a woodstove,

three cords of ash, an axe; I want

a clean gas flame.  She wants a row of jars:

oats, coriander, thick green oil;

I want nothing to store.  She wants pomanders,

linens, baby quilts, scrapbooks.  She wants Wellesley

reunions.  I want gleaming floorboards, the river’s

reflection.  She wants shrimp and sweat and salt;

she wants chocolate.  I want a raku bowl,

steam rising from rice.  She wants goats,

chickens, children.  Feeding and weeping.  I want

wind from the river freshening cleared rooms.

She wants birthdays, theaters, flags, peonies.

I want words like lasers.  She wants a mother’s

tenderness.  Touch ancient as the river.

I want a woman’s wit swift as a fox.

She’s in her city, meeting

her deadline; I’m in my mill village out late

with the dog, listening to the pinging wind bells, thinking

of the twelve years of wanting, apart and together.

We’ve kissed all weekend; we want

to drive the hundred miles and try it again. 

 

 

 

 

"
"

O Venlo, Venlo, stedje van pleseer. This time

her body made him think of countryside,

some figure from his childhood, sun on scythe,

wind blowing shadows across the shining barley,

 

the milk-pail dented from use, the smell of leaf-mulch

and leather in the tack room. Soon she’d take bus

and ferry from London to Belfast, but first

the fire in her bed-sit. Her fingers traveled too,

 

down the raised purple scars along his vertebrae,

the flannel sheets between her thighs, his hair

trailing along her abdomen, the quill

of a feather poking through seams of the comforter,

 

the comforter itself. Those scars—he’d lied

to her, his time in Nicaragua, thugs cut

him coming from the fields. The bloodier fight

was with his brother, slicing tines of a pitchfork

 

plucked up along the flooded Maas. Everything

reduced to trinket and anecdote, the beer

and facepaint of carnival, street-dance and tuba,

beyond the muddy English roundabouts, the brown

 

and white waves, yellow lamps along Dutch highways,

his work at the union office pinned beneath

a glass globe paperweight—shaken

it showered silver snow over the wide

 

straw hat, red and green plow, the slouching body,

a campesino from days before Somoza fell.

He wondered if she were any better, smuggling

French social theory into Ulster, encounter

 

groups in the rec-centers of tower-block basements.

She’d just gotten the news: her last lover died

in a fire along the side of the highway, body

broken in seven places, silver chrome,

 

pearl and gold gas tank scorched, his bike crumpled

beneath the husk of an overturned van.

There wasn’t much to talk about. Afterwards she lay

with her back to him and he sang her carnival songs

 

in a language she didn’t speak, O Venlo, stedje vanpleseer. He thought of himself as the sun, kissing

her neck at the hairline, turning grey cobblestones

of the town-square silver, marshaling parades.

 

"
"

Forget contingencies from weather and wind,

my Helen’s head was shaved, the shortest bit

of stubble growing in. With darkened arching

black eye-brows, Betty-Blue mouth penciled red,

 

jet patent-leather trench and high-heeled boots,

she seemed more mannequin for Fashion Ave.’s

penitent spread than enemy to brass

at Camp LeJeune. Simply and grudgingly put,

 

her talk was action. Invincible in Bell-

Atlantic block and tack, she converted non-coms

and saved CO’s, harped flint and skinned the chair

of military courts through well-pitched cheek,

 

prompt dispatch from the War Resister’s League.

She looked good even on a bicycle, hemming left

through traffic on Fourteenth Street, locking up

on Lafayette or Grand. She doused for me

 

to celebrate—marched right through human waste

and Bowery puddles, stretched her legs over the last

old-fashioned hobos up to East Second Street.

Those ancient days, our vestibule was manned

 

by crack-dealing Stan, a concierge of wit

and improv, half his face scored by orange scars

from hydrofluoric burns. He kept the place safe.

But I had gone, cleared out behind a gang

 

of kids from Bronxville high on catnip wins,

shell-game victims. Left Stan my toaster, shelves,

a wire bird-cage, and, for once, nothing to say.

Except to ask if he could touch her skull.

Even now it makes no sense. Her precedents

I knew lurched out of focus: photos from France

after the Vichy fell, Jeannes and Sylvianes

who’d made Nazi moll; those Belfast girls

 

last-ditched by soldier boys or peelers; two-

toned Bergen-Belsen, bald sister to Fort Santiago.

Then Squeaky Fromm, the other Manson moms,

at Charlie’s trial. Extremes of Joan of Arc,

 

or even Buddhist nuns. Hated, chastened—

or chaste, at least. Not what you’d run (I ran)

your fingers satisfied across, the stubble

surprising, soft as mink or fox, and arch

 

your back, as I did once she found me uptown,

say yes I give again when she went down—

and faster now, quick as the television

dropped after dishes to the curb—or slipped

 

gradually up, the seconds separating

as slowly as but more exquisitely than

ticks off expensive fifty-minute hours—

and some community service—all gone, and just

 

as easily forgotten the raft of former friends

I’d cursed and floated off the island. Shaved head,

her slender neck, dark shoulders—that was half—

or less—her most convincing argument.

 

"
"

Country people rise early as their distant lights testify. They don’t hold water in common. Each house has a personal source, like a bank account, a stone vault. Some share eggs, some share expertise, and some won’t even wave. A walk for the mail elevates the heart rate. Last November I saw a woman down the road walk out to her mailbox dressed in blaze orange cap to boot, a cautious soul. Bullets can’t read her No Trespassing sign. Strange to think they’re in the air like lead bees with a fatal sting. Our neighbor across the road sits in his kitchen with his rifle handy and the window open. You never know when. Once he shot a trophy with his barrel resting on the sill. He’s in his seventies, born here, joined the Navy, came back. Hard work never hurt a man until suddenly he was another broken tool. His silhouette against the dawn droops as though drought-stricken, each step deliberate, down the driveway to his black mailbox, prying it open. Checking a trap.

"
"







Some are born to sweet delight.                  


 Some are born to endless night.


 —William Blake, “Auguries of Innocence”









We spend our lives trying to grasp the premise. William Blake is not, for instance,

William Blake, but rather a 19th century accountant from Cleveland on the

lam for murder & the theft of a horse. In the closing scene,

 

he is going to die, & so is Nobody, his half-Blackfoot, half-Blood guide.

Sure, this is a Western, a morality tale

                                                                     about a destiny made manifest

through the voice of a gun & a hero whose mythic flight from innocence

 

destroys him. But we all come to the end of the line soon enough.

The obvious just seems wiser

                                                     when Nobody says it. Time, it turns out,

is the most common noun in the English language, as if by constant invocation,

 

we could keep it at bay.

                                             Yesterday, I sat in another state on a large rubber ball

in my brother’s basement bouncing my newborn nephew in my arms.

His mother, on the phone with a friend, asks what we should fear more,

 

the hobo spider or the poison that kills it. I want to whisper into his ear

something that feels like knowledge:                                                                   Once upon a time, there was nothing& one day, there will be nothing again. This is the faraway place

 

to which his tiny weight calls me. If he could understand the words. I think,

he would know what I mean, having only just sprung himself

                                                                                                               from that fine sea.

Sometimes we coo to soothe him: Don’t cry, Little Bird. I know, I know.

 

But only the roar of the vacuum finally calms him,

                                                                                           for nothing sounds as much

like the lost world of the womb as the motors of our machines.

The root of travel means torture, having passed from Medieval Latin

 

into Old French. As the action opens, Johnny Depp, shot in black & white,

is already rocking into night on a train. And soon, he will begin his dying.

This is not to say that the inky band fanning across the morning blue

 

of a kestrel’s tail feathers

                                             has no meaning, or the first fingers of rust

coming into bloom on the green enameled chassis of a Corona typewriter

left in the rain.

                           Direct observation, the naturalist Niko Tinbergen assures us,

 is the only real thing. Perhaps this is what I should tell him.

                                                                                                             Or that this moment,

too, is a part of some migration. Every snow bunting composes its own song,

& a careful watcher can tell one kittiwake from its neighbor by the little dots

 

on the tips of its wings.

                                          The most used verb is also the most humble—

merely to be.

                        Nobody can teach to William Blake the auguries of William Blake.

We are, instead, our own vatic visions, bumbling prophets. Our sense of ourselves

as invented as film.

                                   Later, in an ocean-going canoe lined with cedar boughs,

he will drift out into cold breakers, two bullets in his chest. But, here,

in his small hat & wire glasses, he still seems

                                                                                 sweetly comic. He holds up a letter;

 

someone’s promised him a job. His fancy plaid suit makes him look like a clown.

"
"







     What objects may be in themselves, and apart from all     


     this receptivity of our sensibility, remains completely    


     unknown to us. We know nothing but our mode of     


     perceiving them. . . . With this alone have we     


     any concern.


     


     —Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason









At a church rummage sale, I study the perfection of shadows

in a painting by Caravaggio, although what I hold

is only a small print of Christ—its frame broken—dining

at Emmaus with three of the Apostles. And because the table

is dramatically, if not unbelievably, lit, the bowls & pitcher

& loaves send their dark crescents onto the immaculate

white cloth. When the Savior raises his hand to offer a blessing,

its shade deepens further his crimson smock. Tenebrosus:

that rich, convincing darkness. As though the master understood

that the obscured world only seems to us somehow

even more familiar, as though our sense of our own unknowing

had at last been made visible—even if what we do not know

cannot itself be seen. The future’s drape, the carnival fortunetellers

of my childhood might have called it, but also the now’s,

displayed as it is—so many unmatched cups & saucers, old coats

& wicker baskets—all around us. At a party last week,

someone said verisimilitude. We were huddled on a tiny porch.

It was the first cool night & the wine had no conclusion.

 

The talk turned quickly to shepherds & the pastoral & then,

to opera, before someone recalled a horror film he’d watched

late one night with his brother. In black & white vignettes,

an evil tree stump possessed by the spirit of an executed prince

hunts the scheming tribal elders who have destroyed him.

A former pro wrestler in a costume of wire & rubber bark

& wearing a permanent scowl lumbers after vengeance

in the confusion & fear of 1957 on a half-dozen root-legs,

driving his victims into quicksand or toppling himself over

upon him. Though here the point is the teller’s small brother

& the boy’s allegiance, even in a state of suspended disbelief,

to what we call sense. How, he wanted to know, suddenly

unusually earnest, did the tree manage to get itself up again?

 

Yesterday I spoke to a friend who is despairing: back home,

waiting tables, he’s dating a woman whose marriage has only

just come to an end. When he wakes, he discovers he does not

recognize himself. One afternoon, walking home from school,

I hit my best friend in the face with a book. It may well be

that she hit me. Thin pages flew out into the street. More punches

were thrown & I came away bruised. In that book, a novel

by Emily Brontë, the land is violent & unjust & we are violent

& unjust upon it. Even worse, our greatest passions

change nothing at all. Before one of us hit the other,

there must have been a cause, but I can’t recall it, which makes it

seem nonlinear now, &, thus, apocryphal, both impossible

& impossibly real. I failed, though I tried, to offer comfort.

 

It’s not that our lives don’t resemble our lives. I’ve been alone

so often lately I sometimes catch myself watching myself—

breathing in the fresh spears of rosemary or admiring the shallots,

peeling their translucent wrappers away, centering one on the board,

making the first careful cut, lifting the purple halves.

 

Before stories, we were too busy for stories, too busy

hunting & suffering to invent the tales of our own

resurrections. Caught out in the kitchen’s brightness last night,

the handle of the skillet cast its simple, perfected form

across the stove—pierced, like the eye of the needle, so that

it can be hung from a hook, as pans, presumably, have always been.

 

Outside the wind picked up. Thunder. The dog trotted off,

hid her head beneath the chair. But today: a charity sale

at Trinity Chapel & sun on the tar of the buckled walks.

In the cracks, beads of water spin into light. Tell yourself

it’s simple: this is where it’s been heading all along. Tell yourself

something you have no faith in has already begun to occur.

"
"







One man prays: How shall I be able to lie with this woman?


      Do thou pray thus: How shall I not desire to lie with her?


      Another prays thus: How shall I be released from this?     


      Another prays: How shall I not desire to be released?


      —Marcus Aurelius









When we are lost in our longings, Aurelius, already it is too late:

there is already nothing we can do. I have rarely desired an end

to my desires. We are so in love with our wanting. Last week,

though doctors were quick to repair it, a baby in India was born

grasping her own beating heart in her fist. Today, a Dumpster

arrives from Dave’s Trash Removal & I begin to fill it. I toss in

a transistor radio that hasn’t worked in years. A man walking past

asks if he can take it. Later, he returns & carries off a broken TV.

A neighbor salvages the dented gray fuse box; a girl wants a window,

a paper bag full of tangled cords. All night I listen to the wind

& the echoes of feet kicking through rubbish, like a mouse nesting

inside a drum. My older brother is dead a decade. Yet here

in its enormous gold frame is the familiar, pastel portrait

someone named Maxwell drew for our mother, an inaccurate

rendering of the two of us when we were small. I can’t look at it;

I can’t throw it away. Every change is a death, you tell yourself,turn thy thoughts now to thy life as a child. . . . One day, I tell myself,

I will shut all the doors, leave everything behind. The museum

is showing a hundred tricked-out Victorian photographs

of that other world: the hoax of floating fairies, women haunted

by ghostly blurs. Another century & still we want to believe

in what we know cannot be true. Your words, Aurelius, have found me,

but you could not. If we are disappointed, we have only ourselves

to blame: Wipe out thy imagination. We fill our hands when they are

empty. We empty ourselves when we have held too much too long.

"
"

   Grandma is washing me white. I am the color of hot sand in the bleached sea light. I am a stain on the porcelain, persistent as tea. Stay in the shade. Don’t say she was the only one. Cousins opposite say: you too white. I am a night-blooming flower being pried open in the morning. My skin a curtain for a cage of bones, a blackbird coop. My heart is crusty bread, hardening. Hardening. This way, I feed my own fluttering. Under shade, the day looks like evening and I cannot bear the darkness. Don’t say, I can’t stand to be touched. Say, I stare into the sun to burn off the soiled hands that print my body with bloody ink. Don’t say, Mulatto. Say, I am the horse in Oz turning different colors, each prance brightening flesh. A curiosity. Don’t say, Bathwater spiraled down into the pipes. Say, I never did fade. Say, Skin holds the perseverance of my days. Folding, folding, the water continuously gathers, making wrinkles in a map.

"
"

Eat cereal. Read the back of the box over and over. Put on my red velvet jumper with white heart shaped buttons. Walk to the bus, pick up discarded cigarette butts and pretend to smoke.


 


Get on the bus. Girls yell, Wire head, ugly black skin. Take a window seat, under the radio speaker. Look for cats hunting in the fields.


 


Go to class. Stay in at recess. Steal chewing gum, plastic green monkeys and cookies from desks. Eat in bathroom stalls. Pure white light pours in.


 


Try to get a bloody nose by punching myself in the same bathroom after lunch.


 


The teacher passes around pictures of herself pregnant. You were fat! I yell.  Everyone laughs. I lap it like licking honey from a spoon. I was pregnant, what’s your excuse? Everyone laughs. I swallow stones.


 


Grow tired in the afternoons, droop like a sunflower in the lengthening light.


 


Get on the bus. Girls yell, Brillo-head! Zebra! Sit in an aisle seat. Your father’s a nigger! I say, No, he’s a fireman. Laughter all around. Pinch myself shut like squeezing soap from a sponge.


 


Walk home. Sometimes find an unsmoked cigarette in the gravel along the curb—long, white, new. Put it to my lips, pull it away and hold it aloft, movie-star-like, all the way home.

"
"

A boarded-up house. Ransacked inside — broken glass and toppled tables, chairs overturned, books shaken for hidden money.


 


There are mouths in dreams full of gold teeth, chewing bread and meat. The body is hollow as flame and will burn down anything if pointed straight.


 


A bird flies in through the door, then flutters at the window. Although he is tiny, I am too afraid to help him escape.


I’ve made myself another house. I hum to fill its empty rooms. I fold in like saloon doors closing, then swinging out, keeping out thieves.

"
"

I am trying to remember the lyrics of old songs

                                                            I’ve forgotten, mostly

I am trying to remember one-hit wonders, hymns,

                                              and musicals like West Side Story.

Singing over and over what I can recall, I hum remnants on

                                                             buses and in the car.

 

I am so often alone these days with echoes of these old songs

                                                          and my ghosted lovers.

I am so often alone that I can almost hear it, can almost feel

                                                        the half-touch of others,

can almost taste the licked clean spine of the melody I’ve lost.

 

I remember the records rubbed with static and the needle

                                                                     gathering dust.

I remember the taste of a mouth so sudden and still cold from

                                                                         wintry gusts.

It seemed incredible then — a favorite song, a love found.

                                                                It wasn't, after all.

 

Days later, while vacuuming, the lyrics come without thinking.

Days later, I think I see my old lover in a café but don’t,

                                                                        how pleasing

it was to think it was him, to finally sing that song.

 

This is the way of all amplitude: we need the brightness

                                                                         to die some.

This is the way of love and music: it plays like a god and

                                                                       then is done.

Do I feel better remembering, knowing for certain

                                                                       what’s gone?

"
"

I like it when they get together and talk in voices that sound like apple trees and grape vines,and some of them wear hats and go to Arizona in the winter, and they all like to play cards.They will always be the ones who say “It is time to go now,” even as we linger at the door,or stand by the waiting cars, they remember someone—an uncle we never knew—and sigh, allof them together, like wind in the oak trees behind the farm where they grew up—a placeI remember—especially the hen house and the soft clucking that filled the sunlit yard.

"
"

The marriage ran under their skin, a rash, or maybe

all that red wine, luminescent cocktail hours

in which lost books were rediscovered, or just a rash,

a reaction sending out runners across her chest,

a vine, something close, ruby scarves coming back

into fashion, their son coming back

from school, from the yard, but now, dinnertime

and the family parted, split houses, her ex and his anger

spread down the long hallway of their house

and into the windows of her new apartment, their daughter’s doubled

beds, her doubled face in family portraits that double

in frequency, a family set down and another, this dinnertime

and more red wine, our faces flush with love and sympathy,

the mother decides to see the son again, and so

our doubled flashlights giving us heaven and earth,

all of it safe or at least unmoving, the tall fence

her ex built to hide the little grave, to guard the lot

in this registered historic district (all of the houses

bear their stories on a plaque, their first stories,

run-on, this little town with no street lights, just moon,

cedars), the tall fence behind which is the yard, blue,

in this yard no marker stone and under this stone

their son’s everything, no double,

no double

"
"

In this land the children tear their hearts in half.

Let me explain. If ten things are wanted, only ten

can be had. If a stand of birches is found to be made of tin,

the soil around them will bleed with rust. In this land children

study their magazines in broad daylight, and in their books

any soldier who stumbles will not fall. No one will fall,

a gift parents try not to make much of. At every meal

some is set aside. In every garden a patch lies fallow. At parties

there are whispers of illegal cheeses. Camembert, especially,

is said to taste alive. And so the children learn

to make room. To leave some.

Nothing will come, but nothing will go.

To love like this half must rattle in its pit.

"
"

The casseroles just showed up.

According to her sister a symbolic casting

 

of the feminine, not gender but physics, dear—

according to a friend she looked

 

just like her sister, green bathrobe mid-afternoon,

suitcase still in the trunk.

 

She’d carried him dead for days.

Out above the reeds a sphere of birds

 

stretches and knots, rises as one

brown then belly-white. Oh the hunger

 

when it came filled every chair.

"
"

The first person in recorded history

struck by a comet slept on her couch

across the road from the Comet Drive-In

 

and the comet found her roof, her sadness, her knee,

and woke her. Everything that hurts

 

hurt before, she said. Showing at the drive-in, a documentary

on tightrope-walking: a young man frustrated

that his dream, the World Trade Center, was not yet built

 

so he practiced for years in a meadow crossing intended sky, intent

like a pillowcase sweetening him, no harm . . . Here

 

let the towers go, let them write his crossing, cursive, back and forth

 

his name steadying our tongues . . . Famous, overcoat

floating down without him, the idea that we stand

 

where we mean to stand, 1974, a distraction

 

from my parents’ morning commute. At 59th Street they split.

The poems I was writing were no longer poems of their divorce,

 

my father’s sweeping gestures or his pain, the old Volkswagen

and garden hose—all of that had washed from my poems

 

and instead an imaginary family arrived in borrowed gardens,

their son stillborn—even as I grew heavy with my own son

I wrote poem after poem holding this imagined horror close.

"
"

is an imaginary flower that never fades.

The amaranth is blue with black petals,

it’s yellow with red petals,

it’s enormous and grows into the shape

of a girl’s house,

the seeds nestle high in the closet

where she hid a boy.

The boy and his bike flee

the girl’s parents from the tip

of the leaves, green summer light

behind the veins.

The amaranth is an imaginary flower

in the shape of a girl’s house

dispensing gin and tonics

from its thorns, a succulent.

This makes the boy’s bike steer

off-course all summer, following

the girl in her marvelous car,

the drunken bike.

 

He was a small part of summer,

he was summer’s tongue.

"
"

They learned to turn off the gravity in an auditorium

and we all rose into the air,

the same room where they demonstrated

pow-wows and prestidigitation.

 

But not everyone believed it.

That was the most important lesson

I learned—that a truck driven by a dog

could roll down a hill at dusk

and roll right off a dock into a lake

and sink, and if no one believes you

then what is the point

of telling them wonderful things?

 

I walked home from the pow-wow

on an early winter night in amazement:

they let me buy the toy tomahawk!

As soon as I got home I was going

to hit my sister with it, but I didn’t know this.

"
"

It was a good day and I was about to do something important

and good, but then I unscrewed the pen I was using

to see the ink. Precision German craftsmanship.

The Germans are so persnickety and precise,

they wash their driveways. Their mountains and streams

dance around each other in a clockwork, courtly imitation

of spring. They build the Panzer tank, out of rakes

hoses and garden gnomes; they built me.

And I’ve seated myself above an avenue on the brink

of mystery, always just on the lip, with my toes over the lip

but my bowels behind.

 

When I replaced the ink the sky was socked in,

only one window of blue open in the north, directly over someone.

But that person was reading about Rosicrucians in the laundromat,

he was unaware as the blue window closed above him.

The rest of us are limp and damp,

I see a button in front of us that says “spin cycle.”

I’m going to push it.

"
"

I wake up, bound tightly.

A warm, valerian smell cascades

to my palate. I can only move

my eyelids and toes.

Heat sits impishly on my chest,

at my throat, curtains of it brushing against me.

Panic creeps out of my armpits.

I can only move my eyelids and toes,

and this constant fluttering

lulls me to sleep.

 

I awake late and move like a bee

through the apartment,

from station to station

from the blue flame

to the shimmering disc.

From the stairs to the street,

to the grocery store.

To the meat aisle. To the cocktail wieners.

To make pigs-in-a-blanket,

to share them with friends.

To sink into bed, to bind myself

tightly in blankets, to flutter off into sleep,

and then on past sleep,

to be carried by admirers across a wooden bridge.

Later I will burn this bridge.

"
"

We holler these trysts to be self-exiled that all manatees are credited equi-distant, that they are endured by their Creditor with cervical unanswerable rims. that among these are lightning, lice, and the pushcart of harakiri. That to seduce these rims, graces are insulated among manatees, descanting their juvenile pragmatism from the consistency of the graced. That whenever any formula of grace becomes detained of these endives, it is the rim of the peppery to aluminize or to abominate it. and to insulate Newtonian grace. leaching its fountain pen on such printed matter and orienting its pragmatism in such formula, as to them shall seize most lilac to effuse their sage and harakiri.

"
"

Music: Sexual misery is wearing you out.

Music: Known as the Philosopher’s Stair for the world-weariness which climbing it inspires. One gets nowhere with it.

Paris: St-Sulpice in shrouds.

Paris: You’re falling into disrepair, Eiffel Tower this means you! Swathed in gold paint, Enguerrand Quarton whispering come with me under the shadow of this gold leaf.

Music: The unless of a certain series.

Mathematics: Everyone rolling dice and flinging Fibonacci, going to the opera, counting everything.

Fire: The number between four and five.

Gold leaf: Wedding dress of the verb to have, it reminds you of of.

Music: As the sleep of the just. We pass into it and out again without seeming to move. The false motion of the wave, “frei aber einsam.”

Steve Evans: I saw your skull! It was between your thought and your face.

Melisse: How I saw her naked in Brooklyn but was not in Brooklyn at the time.

Art: That’s the problem with art.

Paris: I was in Paris at the time! St-Sulpice in shrouds “like Katharine Hepburn.”

Katharine Hepburn: Oh America! But then, writing from Paris in the thirties, it was to you Benjamin compared Adorno’s wife. Ghost citizens of the century, sexual misery is wearing you out.

Misreading: You are entering the City of Praise, population two million three hundred thousand . . .

Hausmann’s Paris: The daughter of Midas in the moment just after. The first silence of the century then the king weeping.

Music: As something to be inside of, as inside thinking one feels thought of, fly in the ointment of the mind!

Sign at Jardin des Plantes: GAMES ARE FORBIDDEN IN THE LABYRINTH.

Paris: Museum city, gold lettering the windows of the wedding-dress shops in the Jewish Quarter. “Nothing has been changed,” sez Michael, “except for the removal of twenty-seven thousand Jews.”

Paris 1968: The antimuseum museum.

The Institute for Temporary Design: Scaffolding, traffic jam, barricade, police car on fire, flies in the ointment of the city.

Gilles Ivain: In your tiny room behind the clock, your bent sleep, your Mythomania.

Gilles Ivain: Our hero, our Anti-Hausmann.

To say about Flemish painting: “Money-colored light.”

Music: “Boys on the Radio.”

Boys of the Marais: In your leather pants and sexual pose, arcaded shadows of the Place des Vosges.

Mathematics: And all that motion you supposed was drift, courtyard with the grotesque head of Apollinaire, Norma on the bridge, proved nothing but a triangle fixed by the museum and the opera and St-Sulpice in shrouds.

The Louvre: A couple necking in an alcove, in their brief bodies entwined near the Super-Radiance Hall visible as speech.

Speech: The bird that bursts from the mouth shall not return.

Pop song: We got your pretty girls they’re talking on mobile phones la la la.

Enguerrand Quarton: In your dream gold leaf was the sun, salve on the kingdom of the visible.

Gold leaf: The mind makes itself a Midas, it cannot hold and not have.

Thus: I came to the city of possession.

Sleeping: Behind the clock, in the diagon, in your endless summer night, in the city remaking itself like a wave in which people live or are said to live, it comes down to the same thing, an exaggerated sense of things getting done.

Paris: The train station’s a museum, opera in the place of the prison.

Later. The music lacquered with listen.

"
"

Now the summer air exerts its syrupy drag on the half-dark

City under the strict surveillance of quotation marks.

 

The citizens with their cockades and free will drift off

From the magnet of work to the terrible magnet of love.

 

In the far suburbs crenellated of Cartesian yards and gin

The tribe of mothers calls the tribe of children in

 

Across the bluing evening. It’s the hour things get

To be excellently pointless, like describing the alphabet.

 

Yikes. It’s fine to be here with you watching the great events

Without taking part, clinking our ice as they advance

 

Yet remain distant. Like the baker always about to understand

Idly sweeping up that he is the recurrence of Napoleon

 

In a baker’s life, always interrupted by the familiar notes

Of a childish song, “no more sleepy dreaming,” we float

 

Casually on the surface of the day, staring at the bottom,

Jotting in our daybooks, how beautiful, the armies of autumn.

"
"

Our grand peregrinations through these temporary cities,

These pale window box poppies of the laughing class,

Drifting as if time came in the same long dollops as starlight,

Resemble an epic journey as a coffee bean resembles a llama’s foot,

Though the kitchen table may be far from the desert

It’s near in spirit, a yellow oasis before the wind

Starts its restless sweeping of white flower-dust across the lintel,

Marking the fine edge of things like children asleep

At the opera, piled up near the door, summer passing

On its way out. Prince Valiant vowed to sew the horizons

Into a single idea, to put on the blue dress of distance,

Looping past rivers and mountains as one leaps from bed

To bed to make loneliness lonely, the suburbs were for him

A relief, a pageant of calm desire where he settled,

All the king’s horses grazing on forsythia out back

While the evening tilts back out of the night, a kindly drunk

Uncle, and asks you to stay. Was this the end of traveling?

Or just a change in the story over time, as for example howTous les chevaux du roi become Josie and the Pussycats

From one version to the next? So all heroes are deranged

By something quite common yet unexpected, a constellation

Redrawn and named again through the stars

Above the porch don’t shift but seem to sink

Through winter’s pitcher of noircotic ink,

Leaving a single streetlight that burned happily,

Thinking it was the sun, after all it was the day

Of the night and turned the world around it,

We were good sentences and forgot where we started.

"
"

They basically grow it out of sand.

This is a big help because otherwise it was getting pretty enigmatic.

Welcome to the desert of the real,

I am an ephemeral and not too discontented citizen.

I do not think the revolution is finished.

So during these years, I lived in a country where I was little known,

With the thunder of the Gods that protect the Icelandic tundra from advertising,

Great red gods, great yellow gods, great green gods, planted at the edges of the speculative tracks along which the mind speeds from one feeling to another, from one idea to its consequence

Past the proud apartment houses, fat as a fat money bag. I wish that I might stay in this pleasant, conventional city,

A placid form, a modest form, but one with a claim to pleasure,

And then vanish in the fogs of hypnoLondon.

All are in their proper place in these optical whispering-galleries,

The swan-winged horses of the skies with summer’s music in their manes,

The basic Los Angeles Dingbat,

A housewife in any neighborhood in any city in any part of Mexico on a Saturday night.

Every Sunday is too little Sunday,

A living grave, the true grave of the head.

In one shout desire rises and dies.

Composed while I was asleep on horseback

I drift, mainly I drift.

"
"

He faced the sink, one foot up

on the edge of the tub. She stood

behind him, reaching around.

In the mirror, her face rose

over his shoulder like the moon,

and like the moon she regarded him

beautifully but without feeling,

and he looked at her as he would

at the moon: How beautiful!How distant! No smiling, no weeping,

no talking. A man and a woman

transacting their magnificent business

with the usual equanimity. The man

as a passenger walking the ship’s deck

at evening and the woman as the moon

over his shoulder oiling the ocean

with light. Deep in the ship’s belly

pistons churned and sailors fed

the boilers' roar with coal. On deck

just the engine’s dull thrum and

a faint click as the woman sets her ring

on the cool white lip of the sink.

"
"

He slaughtered a six of Miller in thanks

when his supposed schizophrenia turned

out to be mere panic, fewer than half

the syllables and “easily managed with

the new medications.” Chanted that mantra

when his piano teacher’s voice droned on

like an undertow beneath Chopin hours

after she herself had gone home to Queens

and when stop signs seemed to say slightly more

than stop, seemed in fact to convey highly

specific messages to him and him alone

suggesting he assume certain key

responsibilities including twenty-four-hour

telephone contact with his finacée

“to make sure nothing bad happens to her”

and the immediate emergency

closure of the Holland Tunnel…Oh, come

on, Doc! If this isn’t schizo what is?

And after all it took so long to nose

the rental car’s savage servility

through New Jersey for Thanksgiving at her

mother’s that by the time he arrived he

can’t possibly have been the same person

he had been when he left Brooklyn and is

that not a kind of multiple person-

ality? It took hours. And then it was

awkward. Which could describe so many things.

The gangly half-dismantled turkey splayed

on its platter. Her stepfather's lecture

on property taxes and tougher sentences.

The seven-dollar jug of Chablis which

would come up later while he held back her hair.

Every good boy deserves fudge and he tried

to be one and earn huge loamy slabs of it.

He practiced his scales on the steering wheel

as he breezed by stop sign after stop sign

toward the tunnel, stopped to search for the

exact change, then resumed rehearsal as

she, deeply soused, snored wetly beside him

smelling like something spilled on a rug. He

keyed each étude over and over as though

there would not be many more chances or

changes which I typed first by accident

but had the chance to change for which I am

thankful. But what am I doing in here."
"

Photograph found in the road: bejeweled hand

gripping a limp dick. All parties

suffering from lack of ambition. The hills

of Tuscany won’t dapple with sunlight,

and here it is nearly noon. She didn’t

much want the leather jacket, the vendor didn’t

really care to sell it, she hardly tried

it on, he barely praised her beauty, then

everyone wasn’t hungry and went to lunch.

The rubies won’t glow. The delayed train shrugs

on its siding. The penis appears at ease.Osteria, osteria, osteria, osteria.

I knew many words but preferred to say

the same ones over and over, like

a photographer shooting four frames

of the same subject, hoping for one in focus.

This clearly among the other three.

 

"
"







Love is never strong enough to find the words befitting it.


                                                                        CAMUS







All day my husband pounds on the upstairs porch.

Screeches and grunts of wood as the wall is opened

keep the whole house tormented. He is trying to reach

the bees, he is after bees. This is the climax, an end

to two summers of small operations with sprays and ladders.

Last June on the porch floor I found them dead,

a sprinkle of dusty bugs, and next day a still worse

death, until, like falling in love, bee-haunted,

I swept up bigger and bigger loads of some hatch,

I thought, sickened, and sickening me, from what origin?

My life centered on bees, all floors were suspect. The search

was hopeless. Windows were shut. I never find

where anything comes from. But in June my husband’s fierce

sallies began, inspections, cracks located

and sealed, insecticides shot; outside, the bees’ course

 

watched, charted; books on bees read.

I tell you I swept up bodies every day on the porch.

Then they’d stop, the problem was solved; then they were there again,

as the feelings make themselves known again, as they beseech

sleepers who live innocently in will and mind.

 

It is no surprise to those who walk with their tigers

that the bees were back, no surprise to me. But they had

left themselves so lack-luster, their black and gold furs

so deathly faded. Gray bugs that the broom hunted

were like a thousand little stops when some great lurch

 

of heart takes place, or a great shift of season.

November it came to an end. No bees. And I could watch

the floor, clean and cool, and, from windows, the cold land.

But this spring the thing began again, and his curse

went upstairs again, and his tinkering and reasoning and pride.

 

It is the man who takes hold. I lived from bees, but his force

went out after bees and found them in the wall where they hid.

And now in July he is tearing out the wall, and each

board ripped brings them closer to his hunting hand.

It is quiet, has been quiet for a while. He calls me, and I march

 

from a dream of bees to see them, winged and unwinged,

such a mess of interrupted life dumped on newspapers—

dirty clots of grubs, sawdust, stuck fliers, all smeared

together with old honey, they writhe, some of them, but who cares?

They go to the garbage, it is over, everything has been said.

 

But there is more. Wouldn’t you think the bees had suffered

enough? This evening we go to a party, the breeze

dies, late, we are sticky in our old friendships and light-headed.

We tell our funny story about the bees.

At two in the morning we come home, and a friend,

 

a scientist, comes with us, in his car. We’re going to save

the idea of the thing, a hundred bees, if we can find

so many unrotted, still warm but harmless, and leave

the rest. We hope that the neighbors are safe in bed,

taking no note of these private catastrophes.

 

He wants an enzyme in the flight-wing muscle. Not a bad

thing to look into. In the night we rattle and raise

the lid of the garbage can. Flashlights in hand,

we open newspapers, and the men reach in a salve

of happenings. I can’t touch it. I hate the self-examined

 

who’ve killed the self. The dead are darker, but the others have

moved in the ooze toward the next moment. My God

one half-worm gets its wings right before our eyes.

Searching fingers sort and lay bare, they need

the idea of bees—and yet, under their touch, the craze

 

for life gets stronger in the squirming, whitish kind.

The men do it. Making a claim on the future, as love

makes a claim on the future, grasping. And I, underhand,

I feel it start, a terrible, lifelong heave

taking direction. Unpleading, the men prod

 

till all that grubby softness wants to give, to give.

"
"







""The younger brother roasted a breast of Pishiboro's


elephant wife and handed Pishiboro some, which he


presently ate. Then the younger brother said in a


voice full of scorn. 'Oh you fool. You lazy man. You


were married to meat and you thought it was a


wife.'""    FROM A MYTH OF THE BUSHMEN







Poised upside down on its duncecap,

a shrunken purple head,

True Blueberry,

enters its tightening frame of orange lip,

and the cream of a child’s cheek is daubed with

Zanzibar Cocoa, while      Here at the Martha Washington      Ice Cream Store      we outdo the Symbolistes.

a fine green trickle—

Pistachio? Mint Julep?      Words have colors,      and colors are tasty.

sweetens his chin.

In front of me Licorice teeters like a lump of coal

on its pinkish base of Pumpkin.      A Rauschenberg tongue      fondles this rich donnée,      then begins to erase it.

 

Turning from all that is present

in the flesh, so to speak,

let the eye wander off to a menu,

where it can start to ingest

“Quite Sour Lemon sherbet

topped with a stem cherry and chocolate sprinkles

     Swilling in language,

all floating in bubbly cherry phosphate     the bloated imagination      is urged to open still wider     and shovel it in,

and served with a twist of pretzel.”

In this world “Creamy Vanilla and

Smooth Swiss Chocolate ice creams”

can be “blended with chopped pineapple,

dark fudge sauce, ripe bananas, whipped topping,

cookies, roasted nutmeats and nippy chopped cherries.”    the Unconscious, that old hog,    being in charge here of the     creative act.

 

At about the moment my tastebuds

receive a last tickle of Gingersnap

and begin to respond to

Orange Fudge, I look at you

who have bought my ice cream cones for twenty years,    Moving another new ice to the mouth    we needn’t remember

and look away    it is always the same mouth    that melts it.

My mind assembles a ribald tower

of sherbet dips, all on one cone,

Apricot, Apple, Tangerine, Peach, Prune, Lime,

and then it topples.

You are steadier than I.

You order one dip always,

or, in a dish, two dips of the same flavor.

 

In this hysterical brilliance of neon    Come on, consumers,     we’ve got to keep scooping

it is twelve or fifteen of us

to thirty ice creams.

     so that the creams shall not rise     like cold lava out of their bins,     numbing our feet, our knees,     freezing our chests, our chins, our eyes,

Open the door, quick,

and let in two handholding adolescents.

Coping with all those glands

makes them good and hungry.    so that, flying out of their cannisters,    the chopped nuts    shall not top off our Technicolor grave    with their oily ashes.

 

Listen! All around us toothsome cones

are suffering demolition

down to the last, nipple-like tip.

How do we know where to stop?

Perhaps the glasses and dishes

are moulded of candy, and the counters and windows…      Over your half-eaten serving of Italian Delight,      why are you looking at me      the way you are looking at me?

 

"
"

I was out last night,

the very picture of a sneak, dark and hunched-over,

breaking and entering again.

Why do I do it?

And why, when I can afford serious residences,

do I keep to this one room?

Perhaps if I had not lost track of the difference

between the real and the ideal

it would never have happened.

I hide here almost entirely now.

When I go out, when I creep into those silent houses,

I steal newspapers.

An armload, no more than I can carry comfortably.

Sometimes they are already tied up

on the side porch or by the kitchen stove.

Nobody misses them.

They think each other or the maid

has carried them out to the street.

They say there is something intractable out there,

the Law, the Right to Privacy,

the World.

In the days when my obsession was only a wound-up toy,

squeaking and jabbering in my chest,

I could have believed them.

I sit by the window today

(There is very little space left now,

thought I have left corridors wide enough to walk through

so I won't lose touch)

holding my latest on my lap,

handling them, fondling them, taking in every column.

They are becoming more and more precious.

My delusion grows and spreads.

Lately it seems to me

as I read of murders, wars, bankruptcies, jackpot winnings,

the news if written in that perfect style

of someone speaking to the one

who knows and loves him.

Long before they miss me, I think,

the room will be perfectly solid.

When they break in the door and, unsurprised,

hardened to the most bizarre vagaries,

begin to carry out my treasure,

death's what they'll look for underneath it all,

those fluent, muscled, imaginative men,

sweating in their innocent coveralls.

But I will be out in broad daylight by then,

answering,

having accepted utterly the heart's conditions.

Tell them I wish them well, always,

that I've been happy.

"
"

Uniformly over the whole countryside

The warm air flows imperceptibly seaward;

The autumn haze drifts in deep bands

Over the pale water;

White egrets stand in the blue marshes;

Tamalpais, Diablo, St. Helena

Float in the air.

Climbing on the cliffs of Hunter’s Hill

We look out over fifty miles of sinuous

Interpenetration of mountains and sea.

 

Leading up a twisted chimney,

Just as my eyes rise to the level

Of a small cave, two white owls

Fly out, silent, close to my face.

They hover, confused in the sunlight,

And disappear into the recesses of the cliff.

 

All day I have been watching a new climber,

A young girl with ash blonde hair

And gentle confident eyes.

She climbs slowly, precisely,

With unwasted grace.

 

While I am coiling the ropes,

Watching the spectacular sunset,

She turns to me and says, quietly,

“It must be very beautiful, the sunset,

On Saturn, with the rings and all the moons.”

"
"

In the years to come they will say,

“They fell like the leaves

In the autumn of nineteen thirty-nine.”

November has come to the forest,

To the meadows where we picked the cyclamen.

The year fades with the white frost

On the brown sedge in the hazy meadows,

Where the deer tracks were black in the morning.

Ice forms in the shadows;

Disheveled maples hang over the water;

Deep gold sunlight glistens on the shrunken stream.

Somnolent trout move through pillars of brown and gold.

The yellow maple leaves eddy above them,

The glittering leaves of the cottonwood,

The olive, velvety alder leaves,

The scarlet dogwood leaves,

Most poignant of all.

 

In the afternoon thin blades of cloud

Move over the mountains;

The storm clouds follow them;

Fine rain falls without wind.

The forest is filled with wet resonant silence.

When the rain pauses the clouds

Cling to the cliffs and the waterfalls.

In the evening the wind changes;

Snow falls in the sunset.

We stand in the snowy twilight

And watch the moon rise in a breach of cloud.

Between the black pines lie narrow bands of moonlight,

Glimmering with floating snow.

An owl cries in the sifting darkness.

The moon has a sheen like a glacier.

"
"







died June 1916







Under your illkempt yellow roses,

Delia, today you are younger

Than your son. Two and a half decades –

The family monument sagged askew,

And he overtook your half-a-life.

On the other side of the country,

Near the willows by the slow river,

Deep in the earth, the white ribs retain

The curve of your fervent, careful breast;

The fine skull, the ardor of your brain.

And in the fingers the memory

Of Chopin études, and in the feet

Slow waltzes and champagne twosteps sleep.

And the white full moon of midsummer,

That you watched awake all that last night,

Watches history fill the deserts

And oceans with corpses once again;

And looks in the east window at me,

As I move past you to middle age

And knowledge past your agony and waste.

"
"

It is the dark of the moon.

Late at night, the end of summer,

The autumn constellations

Glow in the arid heaven.

The air smells of cattle, hay,

And dust. In the old orchard

The pears are ripe. The trees

Have sprouted from old rootstocks

And the fruit is inedible.

As I pass them I hear something

Rustling and grunting and turn

My light into the branches.

Two raccoons with acrid pear

Juice and saliva drooling

From their mouths stare back at me,

Their eyes deep sponges of light.

They know me and do not run

Away. Coming up the road

Through the black oak shadows, I

See ahead of me, glinting

Everywhere from the dusty

Gravel, tiny points of cold

Blue light, like the sparkle of

Iron snow. I suspect what it is,

And kneel to see. Under each

Pebble and oak leaf is a

Spider, her eyes shining at

Me with my reflected light

Across immeasurable distance.

"
"

The children are back, the children are back— They’ve come to take refuge, exhale and unpack; The marriage has faltered, the job has gone bad, Come open the door for them, Mother and Dad.The city apartment is leaky and cold, The landlord lascivious, greedy and old— The mattress is lumpy, the oven’s encrusted, The freezer, the fan, and the toilet have rusted.The company caved, the boss went broke, The job and the love affair, all up in smoke. The anguish of loneliness comes as a shock— O heart in the doldrums, O heart in hock.And so they return with their piles of possessions, Their terrified cats and their mournful expressions, Reclaiming the bedrooms they had in their teens, Clean towels, warm comforter, glass figurines.Downstairs in the kitchen the father and mother Don’t say a word, but they look at each other As down from the hill comes Jill, comes Jack. The children are back. The children are back.

"
"

Dreams brimming over,

childhood stretched out in legs,

this is the moment replayed on winter days

when frost covers the field,

when age steals away wishes.

Glorious sleep that seeps back there

to the glory of our baseball days.

"
"

Lissen

to the whistle of night bats—oye como va,

in the engines, in the Chevys

& armed Impalas, the Toyota gangsta’

monsters, surf of new world colony definitions

& quasars & culture prostars going blam

    over the Mpire, the once-Mpire, carcass

neural desies for the Nothing. i amble

outside the Goddess mountain. Cut across

the San Joaquín Valley, Santiago de Cuba,

Thailand & Yevtushenko’s stations;

hunched humans snap off cotton heads

gone awry & twist

nuclear vine legs.

Jut out to sea, once again—this slip

sidewalk of impossible migrations. Poesy mad

& Chicano-style undone wild.

Rumble boy. Rumble girl.

In wonder & amazement. On the loose.

Cruisin’ shark-colored maze of presidential bombast, death

enshrined archipelago fashion malls, neutered wars

across the globe come barreling down

on my Neo-American uzi mutations, my uppgraded

2Pac thresholds. My indigo streets, i say

with disgust & erotic spit, Amerikaner frontier consciousness

gone up long ago. Meet my barriohood, meet me

with the froth i pick up everyday & everyday

i wipe away with ablution & apologia & a smirk, then

a smile on my Cholo-Millennium liberation jacket.

No motha’, no fatha’,

no sista’, no brotha’.

Just us in the genetic ticktock

culture chain, this adinfinitum, clueless Americana

grid of inverted serapes, hallucinations of a nation,

streets in racist Terminator

coagulation.

Get loose

after the day-glo artery of a fix.

Power outages propel us into cosmos definition,

another forty-million-New-Dollar-Plantation Basilica,

or is it tender chaos?

My upside-down

Kahlúa gallon oración drool

blackish metal flake desires, the ooze of Dulcinea—

Tepeyac stripper, honey

from Tara’s open green fans. Tara?

Tara, where are you?

Tara of the blessings & weapons against illusion.

Against administrator pig,

against molester snake,

against rooster corporate lust. Remember me?

i am the black-red blood spark worker,

Juana Buffalo’s illegitimate flight usher,

back up from Inframundo.

Quick ooze again,

this formless city space

i live in—

my circular false malaria.

Fungi Town says everything’s awright

without your Holy Wheel,

your flaming tree wombs, this sista’ bundle

i ache for, the one i lost

in a fast brawl for redemption

at the gates of this Creation Mulatto Hotel,

this body passage, this wonder

    fire from the chest.

i stand alone on Mass Man Boulevard.

Look east, look south. Bleary sirens

come howling with vats of genocide &

grey prison gang buses jam

with my true brotha’ wetbacks.

Pick another bale of tropical grape,

another bushel of pesticide & plutonium artichoke.

Cancer tomatoes the biggest in the world.

Bastard word, bracero produce, alien culture—

           power & slime.

Crawl up my back, heavy

loaded on cheap narratives,

Salinas doubles, Atlantis sketched on Gorbachev’s forehead:

you, yes, you, gator-mouthed agent—like gila progeny.

Let’s hustle. Let’s trade.

It is 1:27 A.M. in da rat Arctic.

What do i trade passion for?

Language escapes me. Passion is smoke.

i dissolve.

It is in my nature to disappear. No sista’, no brotha’.

No motha’, no soul. This shred iciness is all,

a crazy register that destroys itself into Polaroid,

into a glacial sheet of multicolored border walls.

Let’s foam & spin flamey

bluish tears for the Thing-Against-Itself, soul-less soul,

this film word surface. Sing out, baby.

Wobble & bop to town.

Drag yo’ hands

across my fine-tuned work train named Desastre

en route to Freetown—engineered African shaman houses

smell of licorice, Ebola & famine blood, of hair torn,

of death owls & cancerous alcoholic livers, of babies sucking

this deep night to come,

then—a busted chink of afternoon copper light wakes us,

yo’ sista’ rolls in with a bag of lemons for Evil Eye,

for the seven-inch ache in her abdomen.

Keep me in stride. You.

i am talking to you, fool. Don’t

just sit there stretchin’ yo’ face.

Tell me why fire yearns for the heart.

Write it down. Say it. Fool. Speak the names.

Conjure the recitations from the coffee cup,

the steel-toe, border-crosser boots.

The grass rips up the morning snow lights, jagged & yellowish.

My AIDS face is hidden. Your rot, my epistemology.

i stand in pure light, a blaze of eyes & arms,

volcanic & solar, autistic, anti-written,

burned by mad friars & clerics, uptown

octopi readers, my long hair falls as reddish honey,

on a naked supple back,

   on breasts small & secretive.

Mystery evades me. Shadows crumble.

Without attention i locate the love void & yet,

i know all is well. My blood rocks to a bolero

out of rhythm, a firefly’s bolero that is,

the one in the dog eye. Hear me

warm up to the multi-night. Scribble poems &

    shout rebuke for the sake of scarred angels,

for Tara, who guides me

in her emeraldine, sequined night of lies.

Hear me now,

kin to the half-collie language that i keep & walk.

Kin now, to the leaves that plunge to the floors;

swivel whiteness without axis, tectonic blasts

without mercy. Straitjackets float on the river infinity.

Pink-skinned fishes stare back

as they evolve into my shape, my babble stream

magnetic juan-foolery. Arm wrestle me

on the soccer lawn, kick me in the balls.

The murder music is for everyone.

   The Last Mayan Acid rock band

   plays Berlin’s latest score:

dead trade market systems for the dead proletariats,

rip up from Bangkok to Tenejapa. Everyone is

meaningful & vomits, everyone deposits

a stench pail, into the Cube—

Neo-America,

without the fissure of intimate thighs. Cross over into fire,

hunger & spirit. i write on my hand:

the road cuts into a star. Go, now, go, fool.

In your lyric wetback saxophone, the one yo’ mama left you,

the Thing-Against-Itself strapped across your hips.

Do not expect me

to name—this Thing-Against-Itself. Play it. Screw it.

Howl up to the Void, the great emptiness,

the original form.Night Journal:

Keep on rockin’, blues fish, the gauze of hte day into night. Out there

somewhere, Dis-America, pick up a chrome bone, the shards of the last

   Xmas

 Presidential extravaganza. You, of course, fool.   

Swivel into the clear. Float over the greenish migrant barracks pocked with wire

torsos, toes wiggle & predict our forthcoming delirium—there is a velvet panther

shouting out OM in funk, there is a tawny word in the middle of the city

thoroughfare, a planetary semi of lives slices the wet animal in half. i am that

punk half panther. My fierce skull & mandible, formidable, my pelt is exact as

witch quartz, a slashed leg tumbles down the highway, battered by every dirty,

steel wheel. Face up to the sky, you, i said, to the brilliant gossip from the

Goddess parade. Outside, outside.

 

 

So.



Crawl up, baby, come on, keep on floatin’—

sliding’, always: for black journeys, always in holiness.

                            From Border-Crosser With a Lamborghini Dream, 1999.  

 

"
"

It’s not that I don’t like the hospital.

Those small bouquets of flowers, pert and brave.

The smell of antiseptic cleansers.

The ill, so wistful in their rooms, so true.

My friend, the one who’s dying, took me out

To where the patients go to smoke, IV’s

And oxygen in tanks attached to them—

A tiny patio for skeletons. We shared

A cigarette, which was delicious but

Too brief. I held his hand; it felt

Like someone’s keys. How beautiful it was,

The sunlight pointing down at us, as if

We were important, full of life, unbound.

I wandered for a moment where his ribs

Had made a space for me, and there, beside

The thundering waterfall of his heart,

I rubbed my eyes and thought, “I’m lost.”

"
"

To cure myself of wanting Cuban songs,

I wrote a Cuban song about the need

For people to suppress their fantasies,

Especially unhealthy ones. The song

Began by making reference to the sea,

Because the sea is like a need so great

And deep it never can be swallowed. Then

The song explores some common myths

About the Cuban people and their folklore:

The story of a little Carib boy

Mistakenly abandoned to the sea;

The legend of a bird who wanted song

So desperately he gave up flight; a queen

Whose strength was greater than a rival king’s.

The song goes on about morality,

And then there is a line about the sea,

How deep it is, how many creatures need

Its nourishment, how beautiful it is

To need. The song is ending now, because

I cannot bear to hear it any longer.

I call this song of needful love my voice.

"
"

By menopause, it’s not just estrogen

my mother lacks. She’s lost her eldest son—

that’s me, the one who’s queer—the doctor who

once made her very proud. These days, I do

my own wash when I’m home, I cook for her

so she can take a break from all the chores

she now refuses to assign to me.

She sits, half-watching Ricki through her tea’s

thin steam, her squint of disapproval more

denial than it is disgust. She hears

much better than she sees—it’s easier

to keep out vision than it is to clear

the air of sounds—and yet I know it’s age

that stultifies her senses too. Enraged

because she’s lost so much, I understand

why suddenly she looks so stunned

as from the television: “. . . Bitch, she stole

my boyfriend, my own mother did! . . .” I fold

a towel noiselessly. I know she thinks

it’s garbage, sinful, crap—just as she thinks

that taking estrogen in pills is not

what God intended, no matter what

the doctors say; or that I’m gay is plain

unnatural, she can’t endure such pain.

The oven timer rings. The cookies that

I’ve baked are done. I’ll make another batch

though she won’t touch them: given up for Lent.

My mother’s love. I wonder where it went.

"
"

Before the glimmer of his sunken eyes,

What question could I answer with my lies?

 

Digesting everything, it’s all so plain

In him, his abdomen so thin the pain

 

Is almost visible. I probe the lump

His boyfriend noticed first, my left hand limp

 

Beneath the pressure of the right. With AIDS

You have to think lymphoma—swollen nodes,

 

A tender spleen, the liver’s jutting edge—

It strikes me suddenly I will oblige

 

This hunger that announces death is near,

And as I touch him, cold and cavalier,

 

The language of beneath the diaphragm

Has told me where it’s coming from

 

And where I’m going, too: soft skin to rocks,

The body reveling until it wrecks

 

Against the same internal, hidden shoal,

The treasures we can’t hide, our swallowed gold.

"
"

How difficult it is to say goodbye

to scourge. For years we were obsessed with you,

your complex glycoproteins and your sly,

haphazard reproduction, your restraint

in your resistance, how you bathed so slight

yet fierce in our most intimate secretions.

We will remember you for generations;

electron micrographs of you seem quaint

already, in the moment of our victory.

How difficult it is to claim one’s right

to living honestly. The honesty

you taught was nothing quite as true

 

as death, but neither was it final. Yes,

we vanquished you, with latex, protease

inhibitors, a little common sense—

what’s that, you say? That some remain at risk?

How dare you try to threaten us again!

Of course, you’d like to make outrageous claims

that some behaviors haven’t changed, that some

have not had access to the drugs that mask

your presence in the body. Difficult

it is, how very sad, to see you strain

(no pun intended) at response—our quilts,

our bravest poetry, our deaths with grace

 

and dignity have put you in your place.

This elegy itself renounces you,

as from this consciousness you’ve been erased.

The love for you was very strong, the hot

pursuits so many of us reveled in—

but what once felt like love was really not.

I hardly know what I will find to hate

as much as I have loved and hated what

you brought to bear upon my verse, the weight

of your oppression and the joys of truth.

How difficult it is—to face the white

of nothingness, of clarity. We win!

"
"

What I would like to give them for a change

is not the usual prescription with

its hubris of the power to restore,

to cure; what I would like to give them, ill

from not enough of laying in the sun

not caring what the onlookers might think

while feeding some banana to their dogs—

what I would like to offer them is this,

not reassurance that their lungs sound fine,

or that the mole they’ve noticed change is not

a melanoma, but instead of fear

transfigured by some doctorly advice

I’d like to give them my astonishment

at sudden rainfall like the whole world weeping,

and how ridiculously gently it

slicked down my hair; I’d like to give them that,

the joy I felt while staring in your eyes

as you learned epidemiology

(the science of disease in populations),

the night around our bed like timelessness,

like comfort, like what I would give to them.

"
"

I. Blood

 

We wondered if the rumors got to her.

I’d seen her with that other girl behind

The Stop and Shop when I was walking home

from school one day. I swear, the two of them

were kissing, plain as that, the grass so high

it brushed their cheeks. I told my teacher so,

and maybe it was her who called their folks.

Before too long, it was like everyone

in town had heard. We waited for them at

the dime store once, where Cedric grabbed her tits

and said I’ll learn you how to love how God intended it, you ugly fucking dyke.

Thing was, she wasn’t ugly like you’d think.

She had a certain quality, a shyness

maybe, and I’d describe the way she laughed

as kind of gentle. Anyway, we never saw her with

that girl again. They say she got depressed—

shit, at the service all of us got tearful.

I got to thinking what an awful sight

it was, all that red blood—it wasn’t in

the papers, but I heard Melissa’s mother,

who was the nurse in the Emergency

that night, say how she was just covered up

in blood. I can’t think how you bring yourself

to cut your throat like that yourself—I asked

the counselor they called in to the school,

and she said something like, What better inkto write the language of the heart? I guess

it proves that stuff from Bible school they say,

that such a life of sin breeds misery.

 

    

    

    

II. Phlegm

 

“My brain is draining from my head,”

he said as once again he blew

his nose. The clock read 3 A.M.;

 

its second hand swept slowly through

another viscous minute. Dead

to even nurses sticking them

 

for new IVs, the other ones

slept off their benders soundlessly.

“I’m losing my intelligence,”

 

he said, and blew. My patience waned.

He thought he was the president:Dementia, KS, HIV

 

were printed in his problem list.

“And plus, I’m getting feverish.”

I can’t recall his name, but I

 

remember hating him—grim wish

that he would hurry up and die.

Just then, he took my hand, and kissed

 

the back of it as though I were

a princess in his foreign land.

“My lady, you are beautiful,”

 

he said, and coughed again. Unsure

of what to say, my own throat burned.

He said, “You can’t know what I feel.”

    

 

 

III. Bile

 

A gun went off and killed a little girl

The day my friend was diagnosed with cancer.

I walked through Central Park; a black dog snarled

At squirrels chattering like they had answers.

 

The day my friend was diagnosed with cancer

I dreamed of killing someone with a knife.

The squirrels, chattering, had likely answers

To all my angry questions about life—

 

A homeboy threatened someone with a knife

Not far from where a cop showed off his gun,

An angry answer to most questions about life.

I watched the squirrels hop, the yuppies run;

 

The cop approached the black kids with his gun.

I wondered how much longer she would live;

The squirrels scattered when the homeboy ran.

I wondered if she’d ever been in love,

 

I wondered who would pray for her to live,

Forgive her for her anger and her weaknesses.

I wondered why it hurt to fall in love.

The cop tried aiming past me, towards the woods.

 

Forgive us for our anger, for our weaknesses:

Through Central Park, past the black dog’s snarls,

The cop gave chase. A skirmish in the woods.

The gun went off—No! shrieked a little girl.

    

IV. Melancholy

 

We picked at it with sticks at first, until

an older kid named Samuel arrived.

He dropped a heavy rock right on its skull;

we watched as thick black slime began to ooze

from somewhere just below its heart—or where

we thought its heart should be. “Raccoon,”

said someone solemnly. The landscaper—

sweat gleaming, like the polished figurines

my mother wouldn’t ever let me touch—

regarded us with keen suspicion from

across the street. We learned what it could teach;

like any body’s secrets, the sublime

receded toward the fact of death. I knew

both sadness, and disgust in love’s untruths.

"
"

Not long ago, I studied medicine.

It was terrible, what the body told.

I’d look inside another person’s mouth,

And see the desolation of the world.

I’d see his genitals and think of sin.

 

Because my body speaks the stranger’s language,

I’ve never understood those nods and stares.

My parents held me in their arms, and still

I think I’ve disappointed them; they care

And stare, they nod, they make their pilgrimage

 

To somewhere distant in my heart, they cry.

I look inside their other-person’s mouths

And see the wet interior of souls.

It’s warm and red in there—like love, with teeth.

I’ve studied medicine until I cried

 

All night. Through certain books, a truth unfolds.

Anatomy and physiology,

The tiny sensing organs of the tongue—

Each nameless cell contributing its needs.

It was fabulous, what the body told.

"
"

Plankton rise toward the full moon spread thin on Wakaya’s surface. Manta rays’ great curls of jaw scoop backward somersaults of ocean in through painted caves of their mouths, out through sliced gills. Red sea fanspulse. The leopard shark lounges on a smooth ramp of sand, skin jeweled with small hangers-on. Pyramid fish point the way to the surface.Ninety feet down, blue ribbon eels cough, their mouths neon cautions. Ghost pipefish curl in the divemaster’s palm. Soft corals unfurl rainbow polyps, thousands of mouths held open to night.Currents’ communion—giant clams slam shut wavy jaws, send shivers of water. Christmas tree worms snap back, flat spirals tight,living petroglyphs against the night.

"
"

One thing you know when you say it: all over the earth people are saying it with you; a child blurting it out as the seizures take her, a woman reciting it on a cot in a hospital. What if you take a cab through the Tenderloin: at a street light, a man in a wool cap, yarn unraveling across his face, knocks at the window; he says, Please. By the time you hear what he’s saying, the light changes, the cab pulls away, and you don’t go back, though you know someone just prayed to you the way you pray. Please: a word so short it could get lost in the air as it floats up to God like the feather it is, knocking and knocking, and finally falling back to earth as rain, as pellets of ice, soaking a black branch, collecting in drains, leaching into the ground, and you walk in that weather every day.

"
"

Until nightfall my son ran in the fields, looking for God knows what. Flowers, perhaps. Odd birds on the wing. Something to fill an empty spot.Maybe a luminous angel or a country girl with a secret dark. He came back empty-handed, or so I thought.Now I find them: thistles, goatheads, the barbed weeds all those with hooks or horns the snaggle-toothed, the grinning ones those wearing lantern jaws,old ones in beards, leapers in silk leggings, the multiple pocked moons and spiny satellites, all those with juices and saps like the fingers of thieves nation after nation of grasses that dig in, that burrow, that hug winds and grab handholds in whatever lean place.It’s been a good day.

"
"







the noun







A disease

of the peach tree

—a fungus

 

distorts leaves.

The first time

I was taken

 

to see him

I was five

or six. A vesicle

 

on the skin

containing

serum, caused

 

by friction,

a burn, or other

injury. He lived

 

on Alabama Street

next to Saint

Peter’s and wore

 

a white t-shirt,

starched and snug.

A similar swelling

 

with fluid

or air

on the surface

 

of a plant,

or metal

after cooling

 

or the sunless

area between

one’s toes

 

after a very

long walk.

Don’t ask me

how it is I

ended up

holding it.

 

An outer

covering

fitted to a

 

vessel to protect

against torpedoes,

mines, or to improve

 

stability. My guess

is that he

brought it out

 

to show me

thinking, perhaps,

I had never

 

seen one

up close,

let alone felt

 

the blunt weight

of one

in my hands.

 

A rounded

compartment

protruding

 

from the body

of a plane.

What came

 

next: no

image but

sensation of

 

its hammer

(my inexpert

manipulation)

digging

into but not

breaking

 

skin—the spot

at the base

of my thumb

 

balloons,

slowly filling

with fluid…

 

In Spanish:

ampolla—an Ampul of chrystal

in the Middle

Ages could be

 

a relic containing

the blood

of someone

 

holy. I’m fairly

certain it wasn’t

loaded.

"
"

I

 

Students, look at this table

And now when you see a man six feet tall

You can call him a fathom.

 

Likewise, students when yes and you do that and other stuff

Likewise too the shoe falls upon the sun

And the alphabet is full of blood

And when you knock upon a sentence in the

Process of explication you are going to need a lot of rags

 

Likewise, hello and goodbye.

 

 

   II

 

Nick Algiers is my student

And he sits there in a heap in front of me thinking of suicide

And so, I am the one in front of him

And I dance around him in a circle and light him on fire

And with his face on fire, I am suddenly ashamed.

 

Likewise the distance between us then

Is the knife that is not marriage.

 

 

   III

 

Students, I can’t lie, I’d rather be doing something else, I guess

Like making love or writing a poem

Or drinking wine on a tropical island

With a handsome boy who wants to hold me all night.

 

I can’t lie that dreams are ridiculous.

And in dreaming myself upon the moon

I have made the moon my home and no one

Can ever get to me to hit me or kiss my lips.

 

And as my bridegroom comes and takes me away from you

You all ask me what is wrong and I say it is

That I will never win.

"
"

I wanted to tell the veterinary assistant about the cat video Jason sent me

But I resisted for fear she'd think it strange

I am very lonely

Yesterday my boyfriend called me, drunk again

And interspersed between ringing tears and clinginess

He screamed at me with a kind of bitterness

No other human had before to my ears

And told me that I was no good

Well maybe he didn't mean that

But that is what I heard

When he told me my life was not worthwhile

And my life's work the work of the elite.

I say I want to save the world but really

I want to write poems all day

I want to rise, write poems, go to sleep,

Write poems in my sleep

Make my dreams poems

Make my body a poem with beautiful clothes

I want my face to be a poem

I have just learned how to apply

Eyeliner to the corners of my eyes to make them appear wide

There is a romantic abandon in me always

I want to feel the dread for others

I can feel it through song

Only through song am I able to sum up so many words into a few

Like when he said I am no good

I am no good

Goodness is not the point anymore

Holding on to things

Now that's the point

"
"

The man who murders his wife

Is not the same as the man

Who goes around and murders a stranger.

 

I am a woman but I am not

The same as another woman.

Identity politics are bullshit.

 

There is only the smart and the evil,

The good and the righteous.

There is only one color on the earth.

 

In its infinite degradations it becomes music and mathematics.

There is shit on my hands

When I have been playing around with specifics.

 

Love your lover. You are a lover.

With each breath God has put a golden faith

Upon the snowy mountains of the world.

 

Here, look at the snowy mountains,

Glittering with snow.

They are wiser than you might think.

 

And in your soul, the small grey animals

Of the world sit and wait to do good

For you, and together

 

We are one thing, bleating a

Somber, scurrying lullaby to

Lapsing pinkish angels.

 

Upon a mountain

The angels smile sleepily as they stretch

Their very long legs, thinking of us.

 

And wise they might seem, us and the angels,

But really it is only God who is wise.

"
"

Kissing the bankteller outside his stairs

In Brighton, MA I cannot lie. I felt the hope

That we once felt, if only for an instant

O the lovely bankteller, like a moose he

Rode my spirit quite outside my clothes

And chrysanthemums sprouted I assure you

Out my nipples when he kissed them.

And the pureness of not knowing him at all

Was really what we all feel when we enter this earth.

There is a newness to the best things that cannot

Be excelled and old things like old love die and rot.

There are old ideas in the world that should be forgotten

There are old ideas and old phrases that should at least

Be recycled for others

There are old plans now that should be new.

There are old thoughts in your head, my reader, and let them die.

Follow me, I am the crusader of the new

My spirit is a plastic rod that channels all our births.

And in the mouths of the little beasts, we shall find the great

Ocean that spits up black bugs all glittering on its shores.

You know there is an anthem to the ages.

There is an anthem of the ages.

This is that anthem

This is that anthem

"
"

The rain whistled.

 

A taxi brought me to your apartment building

And there I stood.

 

I had dreamed a dream

Of us in a bedroom.

The light shining upon us in white sheets.

 

You were singing me a song of your sailing days

And in the dream

I reached deep in you and pulled out a cardinal

Which in bright red

Flew out the window.

 

Sometimes when we talk

On the phone, I think to myself

That the deep perfect of your soul

Is what draws me to you.

But still what soul is perfect?

All souls are misshapen and off-colored.

Morning comes within a soul

And makes it obey another law

In which all souls are snowflakes.

 

Once at a funeral, a man had died

And with the prayers said, his soul flew up in a hurry

Like it had been let out of something awful.

It was strangely colored, that soul.

And it was a funny shape and a funny temperature.

As it blew away, all of us looking felt the cold.

"
"

You have changed me already. I am a fireball

That is hurtling towards the sky to where you are

You can choose not to look up but I am a giant orange ball

That is throwing sparks upon your face

Oh look at them shake

Upon you like a great planet that has been murdered by change

O too this is so dramatic this shaking

Of my great planet that is bigger than you thought it would be

So you ran and hid

Under a large tree. She was graceful, I think

That tree although soon she will wither

Into ten black snakes upon your throat

And when she does I will be wandering as I always am

A graceful lady that is part museum

Of the voices of the universe everyone else forgets

I will hold your voice in a little box

And when you come upon me I won’t look back at you

You will feel a hand upon your heart while I place your voice back

Into the heart from where it came from

And I will not cry also

Although you will expect me to

I was wiser too than you had expected

For I knew all along you were mine

 

 

"
"

When my dad first started to die

All my mom could remember

Was the time he kicked her out

After they first started dating

So that he could go play golf

It is the sort of thing we all remember

When we feel death upon us

I remember he died twice

And once in my dream

I just had to see him all nursed and swaddled as if he were sleeping

But he wasn’t sleeping

I stood in the white light of the nursing home bathroom

With the sun spilling everywhere on me

And tried to talk to him, but never, he’d never listen

People don’t always listen to you when they are dead

But that’s not sad

I get tired

And I don’t listen to one Goddamn thing you are saying

But that is because most of the time you bore me

And when I am finally asleep it is really nice just to dream

I have seen a lot of things in this life

But one thing I saw most readily

Was that despite his eternal heartbreak

And girlish silliness

Mike’s face was kind of sweet, a sweet wind

He is going to think it is weird that I put him in this poem

But I don’t think it is weird that I put him in this poem

 

"
"

We’d often

been included in

 

the weather, whose

changes (as in the

 

still, portending

darknesses of after

 

noon) were hardly

evident, if even

 

manifest at all.

The August rain

 

over Mixcoac

& the deadening

 

of all aspect

at a distance:

 

yet our sudden

wet bodies, firm

 

swelling divested

finally of shirts

 

& trousers, left

beside turbid

 

footprints on

the tiled floor;

 

this tongue, these

lips the lightning

 

over the unchartered

landscape of your

 

thigh: successive

terra nova to

 

resist the still

life of the body

"
"

1.


 


without that, the river which was, a substrata is movement now. mermaid left behind flopping in the pipes. her sludge is the sewer where once they fished to watch the night sky blacken. that one, long lingering, now languishes in a cavernous underground source, fountain for none.


 


music of exhaust and darkening horizons, her hair begins to thin, nails soften, while she waits, a siren of light slow to diminish, wasting rescue. dogs at night are frequent. the scales that once cleaved to her flesh, her skin house shelter, now a day-glow phosphorescence, luminous filth, cleavage, radiating and filtered through her. boils begin to grow, round lumps spurting evanescence, a rainbow of industry, inviting those who come to visit to enjoy her paints, corporeal, images of what might be, a river now sewer then tomb, sanctions while poking her eyes out. no sensible heat.


 


 


 


2.


 


images are wanting. she studies them. let them bury themselves in: no comment no comment.


 


a partial shutter moves through the crowd taking us up along its crest. pubises sway. incarnate and incorporated publicly. swaying us. subjects of.


 


the sap in the oak tree the bugs in the bookbinding. for she renders and has left behind the bark. its carnality upon which I turn. hard by and solitary. the other pole. 


 


 


 


 


 


3. 


 


she means to say


or stubbornness as a means of resistance


speaking about us and for us


 


dread and ailments a celebrated day in liberating explosions of losses disparities and distances dispersed in errors mistaken detours mismade calculations faulty respirations. counter to the stream and in plumes. the pressure transgressed in hands. nor was there another road.


 


trying to gather what is gone. first by pacing. then on her hands and knees with the measuring tape. she’s a period piece asking if. seeking the response she is the question.


 


 


 


 


 


 


4.


 


she means to say we live among a crowded scene. overcrowding faces and malice. a crack in time painted on garden paths. inclined to our desire. we ooze we can flourish there.


 


forward an elephant eleven o’clock rook one o’clock apple and three o’clock lightning perpendicular to spoon soiled underneath apple in line with lightning in line with two cent piece face down. all circling hunted and hunting. elephant trying to leave the scene heading out east spoon facing west constellating failure of identity with apple and rook.


 


 


 


 


 


5.


 


meaning to say. given that. the uncertainty. perhaps. surely. perhaps. figures in. the shape. perhaps. calls. subtract. total. a certainty. the space between. shaped by want. by need. fear of threats. the lure of repetition. her feet admired. their figures. the fear of repetition. start at the end. work back to shape. figure that. days wait. the response. slowness as position. a gap to walk into. opposition. given an entrance. she is on your side. whirlpools of repetition. opening traps. a shape appears. groups itself. more figures. a shape in the doorway. time for gets smaller. tilts inwards. the envelope unshared. first. given that. a set of shapes plan to meet. she is faint. clouds to the west.


 


 


 


 


 


 


6.


 


white metal teeth. describe her lips. how they reveal and encircle them. encircling me. place them in some setting. a long walk. the kitchen at night. hounding toward an untimely end.


 


that which spawns life. one foot in front of the next. spawning more. beating out the attachments. strumming along. not refreshing that. productive and not taking advice. recognizable car engine up the road. another can grow again there.


 


 


 


 


 


7.


 


unjoined. supporting that. permeated and touched. moved by injury. joining not singular. this state. that stare. meaning the look alikes and she is eying those that be.


taken to the extreme. accepting even that. orchestrate a sighing. a fourth. audible sounds of presence. calculating the ooze of difference.


 


a quaver in the voice, it’s the ask if.


 


 


 


 


8.


 


I adopt a hostile attitude towards it. towards want.


 


forced into the background. escaped from the cage prowls about in your life. a ghost of dead business unfinished and naked cash payments between afterglow. intolerable shadow invites back into the fracture. watching the tree grow naked. going down to the port start from the shore of calculations and yawning. it is voracious. its wanting to be included wanting to grow fast. is asunder where the first was rooted out. sifting through the outrages of lightning and blood.


 


 


 


 


 


9.


 


refresh against the sightlines. in its sedimentation along the edge of the mountains. planes overhead. the love of trees indigent and muscular. exploratory chance to disappear bone by bone rancid. finally : slowly : she : exuberant and revolting forcing immobility. along the edges of the mountains replenishing asking Agnes asking Edith. grinding into their own emergence. an unlikely anger such unlikeness. sharp calmness shallow dehydration and a decomposition weary and threadbare. admit nothing turn by turn admitting a hand. expresses weariness. its evanescence its asking to be unlikely bone by bone.


 


 


 


 


 


10.


 


she tells more than she knows. a knot of suffocation. strangling itself. gestures your gait and resolutions. a recipe in permanent access in diversions. the flower dies at the end. a short stifled giggle. I had gone ‘too far’ asking toe to toe.


 


adoring and afar we attend. before talking. the horizon folding in on us. to give in advance of conductivity as a dispatch. regardless of protection she means to say. indeed.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


11.


 


indeed. I can’t declare them for what they are. the approach goes like this. the dogs bark across the street. when and how and where. despairing answers. here it is finally. the days passing as an argument indeed indeed terrestrial. carnal excavating relentlessly. inaudible slow. howling recalcitrance behind the music. beneath the ground.


 

"
"

(from her to ravish meaning ravine On the other side

artifice slumbers in the green. The shadow follows hour

by hour hollow and gloomy and which call me forth)

……………………………….grafted onto the sentenceo a long time distant to hang on my belly obscure parallel

images and tattoos age suggestive of the fingernail grazing

the thigh the valley get turned on"
"

      1

 

an urban image from the eighties

when we hung out at Chez Madam Arthur

and at the back of the room

women wrapped their arms around

nights of ink and dawn

 

 

      2

 

calendar of murmurs

vague caresses about the planet and its water

we could have confused words

but there were doors open

confetti in the midst of darkness

gentle ways

to swoon in a corner with she who

put her tongue in my mouth

 

 

      3

 

focus on yes, on the woman’s

eyelids

caress not silence not word

focus beyond. Hold me back

"
"

You can read almost anything

about angels, how they bite off

the heads first, copulate with tigers,

tortured Miles Davis until he stuck

a mute in his trumpet to torture them back.

The pornographic magazines ported

into the redwoods. The sweetened breath

of the starving. The prize livestock

rolls over on her larval young,

the wooden dwarf turning in the cogs

of the clockworks. I would have

a black bra hanging from the shower rod.

I would have you up against

the refrigerator with its magnets

for insurance agents and oyster bars.

Miracles, ripped thumbnails,

everything a piece of something else,

archangelic, shadow-clawed,

the frolicking despair of repeating

decimals because it never comes out even.

Mostly the world is lava’s rhythm,

the impurities of darkness

sometimes called stars. Mostly

the world is assignations, divorces

conducted between rooftops. Forever

and forever the checkbook unbalanced,

the beautiful bodies bent back

like paper clips, the discharged

blandishing cardboard signs by the exits.

Coppers and silvers and radiant traces,

gold flecks from our last brush,

brushfires. Always they’re espousing

accuracy when it’s accident, the arrow

not in the aimed-for heart but throat

that has the say. There are no transitions,

only falls.

"
"

We all think about suddenly disappearing.

The train tracks lead there, into the woods.

Even in the financial district: wooden doors

in alleyways. First I want to put something small

into your hand, a button or river stone or

key I don’t know to what. I don’t

have that house anymore across from the graveyard

and its black angel. What counts as a proper

goodbye? My last winter in Iowa there was always

a ladybug or two in the kitchen for cheer

even when it was ten below. We all feel

suspended over a drop into nothingness.

Once you get close enough, you see what

one is stitching is a human heart. Another

is vomiting wings. Hell, even now I love life.

Whenever you put your feet on the floor

in the morning, whatever the nightmare,

it’s a miracle or fantastic illusion:

the solidity of the boards, the steadiness

coming into the legs. Where did we get

the idea when we were kids to rub dirt

into the wound or was that just in Pennsylvania?

Maybe poems are made of breath, the way water,

cajoled to boil, says, This is my soul, freed.

"
"

When you hear the knives ring

Turn the page.

I wonder why I am not

Myself of late, ridiculous glass edges

Turn back on themselves

And soon reveal

The hand of an apprentice

And godforsaken embarrassing torch,

Stormy back hallways

Out of the black and wooden theatres.

Crystal Waters plus her driver

Plus her entourage is still rolling out

Of the Sands, Atlantic City

On the soundtracks to shows

Held over at The Fairmount

She is throwing back shots

With the mafia. I have learned

To take apart this American Songbook

And very fortunately as I would take

My audience in confidence

Threads of gold fall closely together

Coming to break us off.

At the first of the shows

I sang this song

And in between I saw him in the hall,

What could I tell you?

“Someday we’ll build on a hilltop high.”

 

 

"
"

5/3/83                                                                                    (Ezra Pound)

 

oZier’s cuRve he wAll,

Phin   hOut   exUltant

seeN   impiDity,

Exultance,

aZ  loR  r-

leAf

Paler   rOck-

layers   at—Un  e  deNho  ia

“HaD  Ever  oZzaglio,

e  tRacciolino

iccArdo   Psit,

IOve  blUer  thaN  oureD

Euridices,

yZance,

a’s  Rest,

use  At  P”

n  Of  trUction  eraNts

faceD,

E  tZ

e  FRance

is

LAnnes  Pire

fOrces,

a  nUisance,

was  Napoleon

1  22nd.

Ery   iZation.”

 

deR   ed   TAlleyrand   Political.

 

e,Orage  id  Up  ter—Night   al—

AnD  E  yZantines

m  pRologo

othAr.

 

Perform pO  e  jUniper,

ws  aNd  e  lanD  E

oZart,

verhanging n-

beAt

Pace

tO  n

oUt  rk,

aNd  owardD  Er  eZzo  heRe  iziA.

 

Ping.

 

 

nOrance”

e—

pUt  er,

aNd  his  Name  on)

anD  Eauty,

nZe)

veRned u45A  Ptake

e  Old  a  qUestion  f  coNduct.)

 

inteD  En  r  Zephyrus.

 

eaR,

Ity,

Are

(Pale  yOung  foUr  hroNes,

y  minD  Ere  aZe,

eaRs  k  StAte  Paris—

NOr  frUit  thiNg,

t   saiD:

Esser  oZart,

‘s  fRiends  te  eAch  Peace  wOrld?

 

n  hUsk  s  fiNished

to  tiDe’s  E

rZo  hiRd  n,

heAven,

“Paradiso”

e

Over  xcUse  ll

aNd   paraDiso.

 

Ey  o  Zagreus

e  aRch  greAt  Paradiso

çOis  noUard,

e  suN  ling,

“De  Et

 

 

 

3 May 1983

New York

"
"

In the harsh glare of an easily


reprehensible life. The channel changer is lost


in the crack of an infinite sofa.


       Everything falls apart, everything breaks


down, torn into a million


              fragments, Jericho everyday.


 


I want to be the blameless


victim in this canceled puppet show,


the marionette every mother loves, the one


souvenirs are modeled from.


 


               (In that lifetime, Elton John will write mushy ballads just


               for me. Michael Jackson will want to be my best friend. He’d


               take me to the Neverland Ranch, and by the llama feeding trough,


               he’d say something like, “You’re a great guy, don’t give up,


               stay positive!” And I’d say, “Michael, you fucking idiot, I am


               positive!” And he’d say, “Oh, you’re so funny! Would you like


               to touch Bubbles?”


               And I would.)


 


In the crux of my hollow innocent youth,


I believed that my teddy bears had feelings.


       To cure me of this, my guardians made me give


them to the church missionaries’ children.


Scrubbed-clean rosy-cheeked blonde kids who smelled


of sweat and talc, who were in constant


wide-blue-eyed bewilderment as to why


they were profusely perspiring in the tropics,


instead of living out some winter wonderland Bobsey Twins


fantasy, who were oblivious


to their parents’ desperate efforts


to save the dusky masses, ignorant enough


to believe in the secret lives of stuffed animals.


               I could not eat animal crackers


because I did not want to hurt the poor things;


but, braised the right way, I could eat


any part of a pig, starting with the head,


working on the soft flesh around the eyes,


savoring its raspy tongue with a dipping


sauce of ginger, chilies and lime.


 


Oh blameless innocent victim.


What measures a lifetime?


 


I used to have this theory about how


much life a human body could hold.


It all had to do with the number


of heartbeats. Each human is assigned a number


determined by an unknown power cascading


over the dark waters of the unformed Earth.


 


       For some, it was a magnificently high number,


seen only in Richie Rich comics, and for others,


it was frightfully low, like twenty-six.


               No bargaining, no coupons,


no White Flower Day sale, no specials. Once


you hit your number, you croak.


                           I imagined the angels in heaven


and the demons in hell gathering to watch


the counters turn, like how I enjoyed watching


the speedometer line up to a row of similar


numbers, and especially when the row of


nines turned into


                           the row of zeros.


 


Oh blameless innocent victim.


What measures eternity?


 


An eternal damnation. An everlasting love.


 


I could not imagine the night sky


stretched out forever, so I decided that it came


to an end at some point, by a velvet rope it ended


and beyond that rope were row after row of cushioned seats,


       a majestic cosmic theater,


playing every movie I can remember.


 


I want to be able to evoke


those blameless and innocent days, to revel


in their ignorance and goodness


as if they have the power


       to protect and to heal,


and to strengthen,


and to bring me to safety


       long after all other resources


               were exhausted.


 


But I emerge anew in the wreckage,


blinking in the sunlight,


 


the residue of salt water in my belly.


 


You know what they say,


God never closes a door before making sure


that the windows are barricaded


and the fire escape is inaccessible.


 


I used to know how to stop the revolution of planets.


 


I used to know how to save the world.


 


Now, I don’t know anything anymore.

"
"

spilling water from my back,

you call and i come.

that exhausted walk to reach you

breathless and no i didn’t run

to see you, i’ve been smoking

too much, same thing.

 

another awkward hug in the car

as my face smashes your cheek

that i can feel it leaving now

is the saddest, a beautiful eruption

you could have picked it off the tree

and chowed

 

but you weren’t hungry.

feeling it dying away all day

much worse than the straining

against the leash, another gorgeous

thing that should not have happened,

gone again.

 

"
"

We were application — aerial shapes investigating their causes as they unfolded their wandering life — possessed of temper, parents, talent, fancy — in books in which characters redeem being from the hands of infidels. I feel soaring pleasure.


 


When I was thirteen I opened my father — title page of my book —to explain exploded powers warmed by a glance. To penetrate the ocean behind the elements and give names — fidelity — from a stream of fire reduced to electricity — over the malignity of an alarming bed — the brightness of a familiar eye commences connection: These are the faces cooped up in one place, and his sweetest voice hiding how the blood circulates, and my peculiar trembled body, the seat of beauty.


 


At the end of two years every object inherited human feelings. I paused and brain exemplified generation. His child pursuing these reflections. My pale cheek and tremendous secrets of fingers.


 


Winter, spring passed — watch the blossom — it breathed hard —convulsive muscles of pearly whiteness — with his watery eyes disturbed by the first kiss traversing my bedchamber. His eyes held up the curtain of the bed. I remained listening, unfinished. My food its white steeple drenched by the rain.


 


We ascended into my room, putting my hands before my eyes —tingle — save me and save me — anticipated with such nervous joy I became capable of shooting forth from the trees — it was a divine spring — that night drawing me out I felt the sensations of others.


 


When shown the body they saw permission — I believe in innocence notwithstanding temptation — whom you loved was a creature who’d fill the air with birds serving you — feelings worked up by events — to wean us fro our future prospects towards a tenderness of fainting limbs, a type of me. I was encompassed by a bodily cloud. I remained rushing at the window.


 


They congregated around me, the unstained pinnacle. I arrived at the same lulling sounds: the giver of oblivion. The ascent is solemn, curling in wreaths — I sat upon the glittering peaks — swelled with sunlight over your narrow beds. I beheld the figure of a man at some distance. As he approached a mist came over my eyes. You are community. Instinctively lying down I covered myself with little winged animals, light from my eyes. Spreading my cloak I covered the ground. One part was open.


 


It was a paradise filled with milk. Uttering a few sounds the young man had been filled up. I awoke into my voice by his means — sun on the red leaves — mounted high in the heavens using gesticulations and a gush of tears. Feelings of kindness and gentleness overcame me. Fringed by deep lashes, I contemplated my companyion…

"
"

fleshes  his dirty  rotten  hunka  tin   I  am  right   strapped  into  head  electrodes   he sticks a gun in teen age drug   Harry S Truman decided to drop first   I am right   sequence   repeat   dim  jerky  far  away smoke   cop rat bares his yellow teet   kicks in the door   I am right   survivors burned   time and place   he throws atom bomb   knocks man to floor   you are wrong you are wrong   he was looking for are wrong   Breaks through door I’m poli   outside bar   Hiroshima   has strayed into Dillinger’s right   is making a difficult decision   right   survivors burned   mixed you child I am he kicks him into 1914 movie   if you are gay I am right   wrong   executioner   officer   I am cop   right enough you are I am right   right   wrong Pentagon   dim jerky far away smoke.


 


I cut up his cut-ups, allegory of an allegory of an allegory of an allegory of a waterfall of mental curlicues whose new meaning is no meaning in extremity. Is a Burroughs to eat? I am timid, abstract, complete, light fever, timid. Barefoot, yells Hey Pop, got any more Dick Tracys?  Burroughs am paying one wrecked penny for the pleasure he’s wreaking on some “boy”; shooting quarts of toxins,  skin a welcome  mat,  body  heroically disjunct Picasso  (two profiles,  left  front  high…).  The stapled urge for self-protection that…Danger is a refuge from more danger. Don’t even know what a Burroughs is.


 


Manhattan Project, first atom bomb test, New Mexico 1945: Oppenheimer and his boys think the planet could go critical. Oppenheimer refigures, the probability remains, “What the  hell.” So-and-so many blasts: radioactive sex causes untold genetic mutations. A carnival of giants, vile luminosity sheeting off their scales and exoskeletons, march out of that desert looking for something to eat. I don’t want to die but witness APPETITE and MURDER tread the vile luminous sand: ant spider Gila monster rattler wasp rat locust lizard grasshopper rabbit praying mantis crow ant spider wasp…The entire town of Soda Bluff stampedes down narrow canyons scattering funeral lights beneath their trembling feet. The destruction of today. Last men, mercenaries on the last patrol, eat rations with dog mouths, then fool around in caustic green dusk; they wear Mylar capes and copper-studded jockstraps. Bud’s withheld a basket musta weigh two pounds of fresh peaches. Bud squirms down with a deep sigh, odor of penetration, he says, “I want to be so embraced.” The last ant cold mandibles his thigh, a howl and spasms from Bud’s lifted body mean death. I send my own spear into the enormous insect eye shattering a thousand selves —point touched pinpoint brain, blue sparks, burning isolation, burning rubber, ant collapses, cold heap of old parts. The reason Bud dies, so that his orgasm stays beyond. I don’t wonder who I am, I wonder where I am—still, nothing to do now but kick back and wait for orders.

"
"

White people leave the express

at 96th Street, collectively,

like pigeons from a live wire

or hope from the hearts of Harlem.

And I’m one of them, although

my lover sleeps two stops north between

Malcolm X and Adam Clayton Powell

Boulevards, wishing my ass

were cupped inside her knees and belly,

wishing this in a dream thick

with inequalities.

 

I live on Riverside Drive. My face

helped get me here. I was

ruddy with anticipation the day

I interviewed for the rooms

near the park with its

snow-covered maples. I was full

of undisguised hope as I

strolled along the river, believing

I belonged there, that my people

inherited this wonderland

unequivocally, as if they deserved it.

 

My lover buys twinkies from the Arabs,

bootleg tapes on ‘25th,

and carries a blade in her back

pocket although her hands

are the gentlest I’ve known.

She ignores the piss smells

on the corner, the sirens

at 4 A.M., the men whose brains

have dissolved in rum. And tries

to trust a white woman who

sleeps near the trees of Riverside.

 

When we go out together,

we avoid expensive

cafés on Columbus Avenue, jaunts

to the Upper East Side. Harlem

eyes us suspiciously or with

contempt beneath half-closed lids.

We have friends there,

hidden in the ruins like gold, who

accept us. When it snows,

we walk boldly anywhere, as if the snow

were a protection, or a death.

"
"

Long before the fresh apple crisis, my life had some form to it. I would wake in the mornings—I would perform something. For example, the day I tried, as one with acute passion might, to win one woman over but accidentally won another—that whole time I had been living like someone. Though I can’t remember his name. His model of optimism provided me with a certain geography that I inhabit in time of need. This time the need was surprising. People tend to have faith that the juice they drink in the morning is the same juice they have always drunk. And apples take their shape naturally. The guy, whose name escapes me now, taught me to look upon others’ concerns as mine to make at home. I was fond of doing many things at home, but my favorite was drinking juice. When my friends came by—they liked to suddenly show up with all kinds of breads in their hands, thinking they knew what I needed and planning to force it on me—I had to tell them I was busy with my juice. Two weeks before the crisis, I had been writing some poems about it. It was a warm day, not entirely different from other warm days in San Francisco. People were on the street. Pale people were on the street, making it to the park and lying there such that the next day they were a little browned. The poems I had written were failures, but dense ones. It seemed appropriate to think the person’s attempt at wholeness was a series of missteps, which if drawn across an afternoon might prove interesting to other people. I had a way of reminding my friends that we were all in pain, but a fruit tart kind of pain strangers can’t help but enjoy. That day I had, in a sense, gathered all my possessions and gone out onto the street with them. I awoke that morning with an urgency to prepare myself for something—not anything life threatening, but definitely personal.


 


My lover, then, wanted to spend much of her life asleep. She had no ostensible reaction to the city’s sudden depletion of all its fresh apples and no hope for them. In a world where a person’s tastes revolve around the kind of sleep she gets, I could not find four people who cared. I thought that if I could find those four people we could really do something. A few of my friends pretended they were chosen. A few neighbors felt bad and made offers. My mother called to console me. My lover—in actuality, the closest person to being a member of the encumbered troop, slept next to me. Sleep became our network: falling in and out of it for change. The rule of survival is that no two people can lie in the same bed and sleep at the same time. So I kept an eye on her and played this game of freshness. If by morning I could quickly run out and do seven things that did not involve longing, she would reward me. Before the crisis, the reward would have needed only to be an apple one. But after the apples were gone. The landscape usually contains the solution to what’s lost. Demographics help people in cars. Some people did not notice me. Some demographers lose sleep and do not notice me. That was two days before. The evening before it was two days before the crisis, I was thinking that I did not think I was asleep. I had been watching the sunlight take the corner of my room and my housemate’s cat in it. When I looked again, there was no light—but I had not been asleep. It’s the way people react to traumatic events. They say, “I had just been there” or will say, “She was just with me.” So the loss of light was emotional and the lost state—demographic. I began to trace things by their disappearance. Alone in the room, my memory, and anticipated darkness going for light. People like to talk about the daytime. People in strange moods often miss the daytime. Before the crisis it was not often that one would find me in strange moods. I had managed a particular kind of balance fortified by a certain satisfaction of taste. I was happy. I mean, I was in my juice.


 


Five weeks before the crisis, I was employed at the natural foods grocery around the corner from my house. I did not really work there, but I went there every week. All but the third Sunday of each month, I would walk in and find all kinds of juice on sale. Not to buy, but to stand next to. Shorter people have the privilege of proximity to most cardboard signs. That was one thing. I would stand there and be something for taller people who couldn’t see. I had gotten into the habit of improvised customer service as a way to peruse the juice aisles without being noticed. My parents thought my talents should have led me somewhere. My father would always say, “If you’re not going to be a people person, then numbers will have to do.” He was surprised that with all the time I had on my hands, I chose to spend most of it alone. Numbers then did hold some mystery for me, but mostly too high and far-reaching to explore. For years I had known that if there was a wall between where I was and where I needed to be, I did not want it there. Some people have personal goals that are demanding. Certain goals make it impossible to lounge around in bed. My decision to drink only fresh juice, which costs as much as a small satisfying breakfast, kept me busy rounding up cash. I would have to leave most friendships behind. As a way of keeping my life “wall-free,” I had to divide my time. I would spend the first part of the day searching for volunteer positions in organic juice factories. The second part of my day I would spend telling people about the first part. The other parts are not of substance here.


 


Twenty-five years before the crisis I had for the first time what would eventually become known to me as apple juice. Twenty-three years later a magazine editor would reject my first attempt to recount that experience in litany. I am always drinking in my poems, a good friend says.


 


In the first years of my life, everything I ate was mush. Today I will tolerate only the toughest of green vegetables and date people who will always forget this. When I had that remarkable glass of apple juice, I had no idea that one day I simply would not be able to find it. The city gets rid of its apples. People find themselves inventing fruit. The day I decided to write poems about it—it was twelve days before the rumors began and fourteen days before the media coverage—I had been resting in my best friend’s easy chair. We were discussing the rise of the smoothie industry when something fantastic occurred to me. Five days later I had twenty poems. When a person writes a poem about her passions, people on the street are bound to notice them. The passions overwhelm the body. She carries the body as though it were the book. The friend whose easy chair gave way to my failures moved out of town the next week, and though I miss her it was the failures that saved me. On every other day any kind of crisis one finds particular sayings helpful. If certain words are spoken quietly into a cup of hot water, with the handle of the cup turned toward the wall, whatever strength found in the person may be mirrored in the wall. The person leaves the house with her hand against this wall but strutting slightly.


 


In the alley behind the natural foods grocery, I met my second lover for the first time. Meeting people in vulnerable places accentuates the passion later. Or it may be so hot that the lover never thinks in the present. And the weather was so hot during the crisis. Only the alleys had shade. Forty-eight days into the crisis, while on a thirst strike, I had to make a run for the alley. Not as though people were after me, but the elements. The foundation of anyone feeling that they must get away is need; at the bottom of any body-based need is grace. When I appeared at the opening of the alley, a woman who not twenty-four hours later would be dozing in my bed was stacking crates against the east-side wall. Women who work against surfaces inspire me to do things—I thought about telling her, or—short women make me want things. All the time while I was growing up I put a lot of demands on my juice; forty-eight days into the crisis she made me forget it. I did not forget it, but was embroiled. The newspapers were saying things about the past. People were celebrating thick juice, and I kept writing those poems. That day in the alley I realized three things about life. While assisting her I learned three things to carry around with me, to disperse when needed. For six months during the crisis, I did not care about the crisis.


 


When my faith returned all my lovers were gone. That morning I woke to the two hundred and thirty-second day of the crisis; I was beneath my bed. It was the sixth day that I had awakened beneath my bed. I was lonely, but I was also sure. Life without juice had taken on the name and shape of my weakest character, who—when we passed on the street—did not know me. I knew it was me by the way my head felt: people find themselves in an idea and feel so specified by the idea that they are compelled to show it. Today all my ideas are liquid. That day of my faith, friends thinking I was sick came by to see me. It would be the last day I spent alone; I was happy, but still would not drink. The juice on my mind was no longer juice. There was an absence there, but one so constant it became familiar. I did not want to drink it.

"
"

My father had a steel comb with which he would comb our hair.

 

After a bath the cold metal soothing against my scalp, his hand cupping

my chin.

 

My mother had a red pullover with a little yellow duck embroidered

on it and a pendant made from a gold Victoria coronation coin.

 

Which later, when we first moved to Buffalo, would be stolen from

the house.

 

The Sunn’i Muslims have a story in which the angels cast a dark mark

out of Prophet Mohammad’s heart, thus making him pure, though the

Shi’a reject this story, believing in his absolute innocence from birth.

 

Telling the famous Story of the Blanket in which the Prophet covers

himself with a Yemeni blanket for his afternoon rest. Joined under

the blanket first by his son-in-law Ali, then each of his grandchildren

Hassan and Hussain and finally by his daughter Bibi Fatima.

 

In Heaven Gabriel asks God about the five under the blanket and

God says, those are the five people whom I loved the most out of all

creation, and I made everything in the heavens and the earth for

their sake.

 

Gabriel, speaker on God’s behalf, whisperer to Prophets, asks God, can

I go down and be the sixth among them.

 

And God says, go down there and ask them. If they consent you may go

under the blanket and be the sixth among them.

 

Creation for the sake of Gabriel is retroactively granted when the group

under the blanket admits him to their company.

 

Is that me at the edge of the blanket asking to be allowed inside.

 

Asking the 800 hadith be canceled, all history re-ordered.

 

In Hyderabad I prayed every part of the day, climbed a thousand steps

to the site of Maula Ali’s pilgrimage.

 

I wanted to be those stairs, the hunger I felt, the river inside.

 

I learned to pronounce my daily prayers from transliterated English

in a book called “Know Your Islam,” dark blue with gold calligraphed

writing that made the English appear as if it were Arabic complete with

marks above and below the letters.

 

I didn’t learn the Arabic script until years later and never learned the

language itself.

 

God’s true language: Hebrew. Latin. Arabic. Sanskrit.

 

As if utterance fit into the requirements of the human mouth.

 

I learned how to find the new moon by looking for the circular absence

of stars.

 

When Abraham took Isaac up into the thicket his son did not know

where he was being led.

 

When his father bound him and took up the knife he was shocked.

 

And said, “Father, where is the ram?”

 

Though from Abraham’s perspective he was asked by God to sacrifice

his son and proved his love by taking up the knife.

 

Thinking to himself perhaps, Oh Ismail, Ismail, do I cut or do I burn.

 

I learned God’s true language is only silence and breath.

 

Fourth son of a fourth son, my father was afflicted as a child and

as was the custom in those days a new name was selected for him to

protect his health.

 

Still the feeling of his rough hand, gently cupping my cheek, dipping the

steel comb in water to comb my hair flat.

 

My hair was kept so short, combed flat when wet. I never knew my hair

was wavy until I was nearly twenty-two and never went outside with wet

and uncombed hair until I was twenty-eight.

 

At which point I realized my hair was curly.

 

My father’s hands have fortune-lines in them cut deeply and dramatic.

 

The day I left his house for the last time I asked him if I could hold his

hand before I left.

 

There are two different ways of going about this.

 

If you have known this for years why didn’t you ask for help, he

asked me.

 

Each time I left home, including the last time, my mother would hold a

Quran up for me to walk under. Once under, one would turn and kiss

the book.

 

There is no place in the Quran which requires acts of homosexuality to

be punishable by lashings and death.

 Hadith or scripture. Scripture or rupture.

 

Should I travel out from under the blanket.

 

Comfort from a verse which also recurs: “Surely there are signs in this

for those of you who would reflect.”

 

Or the one hundred and four books of God. Of which only four are

known—Qur’an, Injeel, Tavrat, Zubuur.

 

There are a hundred others—Bhagavad-Gita, Lotus Sutra, Song ofMyself, the Gospel of Magdalene, Popul Vuh, the book of Black BuffaloWoman—somewhere unrevealed as such.

 

Dear mother in the sky you could unbuckle the book and erase all the

annotations.

 

What I always remember about my childhood is my mother whispering

to me, telling me secrets, ideas, suggestions.

 

She named me when I moved in her while she was reading a calligraphy

of the Imam’s names. My name: translated my whole life for me asPatience.

 

In India we climbed the steps of the Maula Ali mountain to the top,

thirsting for what.

 

My mother had stayed behind in the house, unable to go on pilgrimage.

She had told me the reason why.

 

Being in a state considered unacceptable for prayers or pilgrimages.

 

I asked if she would want more children and she told me the name she

would give a new son.

 

I always attribute the fact that they did not, though my eldest sister’s first

son was given the same name she whispered to me that afternoon, to my

telling of her secret to my sisters when we were climbing the stairs.

 

It is the one betrayal of her—perhaps meaningless—that I have never

forgiven myself.

 

There are secrets it is still hard to tell, betrayals hard to make.

 

You hope like anything that though others consider you unclean God

will still welcome you.

 

My name is Kazim. Which means patience. I know how to wait.

"
"

in ten Minutes

                                           Come back: you will

        have taught me chiNese

                                        (sAtie).

                         shall I retUrn the favor?

                                          Give you

                                      otHer lessons

                                        (Ting!)?

                                         Or would you prefer

                                   sileNce?

"
"

Two guys sucking each other in the steam room

didn’t want anything

to do with me, evidently—

I left them to their comedy.

 

                                     *

 

Legato longings:

wish for walnuts, wish for water,

wish to exorcise this morning’s debauch—

two Fauré nocturnes.

 

                                     *

 

In slow motion

Steve tussled with a motorcycle

trying to run me over

on the boulevard of moon smut

 

splicing together bridges

and lagoons, like the bride

of Frankenstein rushing

to overtake the inert

 

Real, a mass

of facts, some conjugal,

some comic—

contrapuntal tenebrae!

 

 

"
"







for Kenward Elmslie







Down in the boondocks rhematic sinsigns multiply

 

                           jug jug to hungry ghosts,

                           bursting open pearly gates.

 

    “Aint no grace, aint no guilt,

          popcorn twiddle, come full tilt”

 

 

                           handy pathfinders whoop

 

                                           at no-restriction hurdles :

 

 

       Da woid ob sin aint dare at all,

       not in giggles nor reddening toes

 

                 no think blink

                 no tattle no buckle

        high dick fun at the fair.

 

Vestigial legisigns just don’t operate,

 

healty wisps entwining and buzzing,

 

hinterland busy with fresh huggermugger.

 

                                    Replica points:

                                you point your toes

                       in fact it’s toes we fluffily toss.

 

Secret moon lotion rub by reedy pool.

 

“They call me Googoo” I said, I…..

 

 

                                          All upsurge, hot tip

 

                                          green informants signify

 

                                          the trees are barking

 

                                          “cheeze it, the cops.”

 

                                          Trees tease, twinkle.

 

           That need being versed in country things:

 

                                          guiltless I milked the cow,

 

                                          slaughtered chicken,

 

                                          swam with snakes,

 

 

           unjust barefoot hobbledehoy

 

                                                                            ahoy.

 

"
"

(Oakland)

 

Make it

the place

it was then,

 

so full it split

vision to live

there in winter

 

so late & wet

abundance

toppled toward

 

awful—birds

of paradise

a profusion

 

the ripe colors

of anodized

metal; in gutters

 

umbrellas

smashed

like pigeons,

 

bent ribs bright

among black

slack fluttering;

 

camellias’

pink imagoes

dropping

 

into water

& rotting,

sweet stink—

 

& did not

stop :

the inundated

 

eye, over-

populous

urban eye,

 

the whole

place, to look

at it, was

 

a footprint

in January :

everywhere

 

cloudy water

rising to fill in

the outlines,

 

& meanwhile

indoors differed

by degree

 

alone : without

love, loosed

from God,

 

there were

lovers & touch

rushing in

 

to redraw

your boundaries

constantly

 

because

it was a tune

you kept

 

getting wrong,

the refrain

of what it meant

 

to live alone,

months of that

and then 

 

.

 

sudden summer, sheer release, streets all cigarettes & sashay,

   balls-out tube tops, low-riders & belly fat, the girls on the block

 

all like Oh no she didn’t, and girl, she did, she was mad skills

   with press-ons & a cell phone telling him where to stick it, a kid

 

on her hip, just like that, summer, sheer beauty & lip gloss

   that smelled like peaches, & you going to the store for whiskey

 

& condoms like everyone else on a hot, long afternoon

   so long & hot it would just be sunburn to walk anywhere if it weren’t also

 

a pleasure, thoughtless & shiftless & horny & drunk,

   just someone thinking summer wasn’t up to anything deep, & lo

 

there he was, his punk ass pink as a Viking in a tight

   wifebeater & lingering by the public pool, drinking beer so sly

 

it didn’t look illegal, & he wasn’t a good idea but

   did you have a light? & it seemed the whole summer went like that,

 

taking fire out of your pocket & giving it away, a ditty

   you could whistle it was so cliché, like the numbers they gave you after

 

& you never called, the number of swollen nodes of the kissing

   colds you got & later the number to call to get tested, the number of the bus

 

to the clinic, the number they gave you when they asked

   you to wait, the number of questions asked, number of partners, number

 

of risks, number of previous tests, the number of pricks

   —one—to draw the blood, the number of minutes you waited before

 

results, & then you decided you had to get the tune right,

   the how to live it so it doesn’t kill you, to take a number & wait in the long line

 

of the city’s bankrupt humanism like the bus that never comes

   no matter how long you wait, & the grocery bag breaking, & if you were going

 

to sing that one, the one that sounds like all I got is bruised

   tomatoes, broken glass & dirty bread & no one waiting at home, would you

.

 

start with genius,

as in, the spirit

of a place?,

 

& small, as in

of the back, wet

in heat

 

& the urge

to touch him

there, skin

 

just visible

between his jeans

& t-shirt,

 

to see if

he’s sweating,

to see

 

if he feels

what you feel?,

& if he does,

 

is that all

the spirit the place

will give,

 

a small thing

shared, just

a phrase, not

 

a whole song,

but something

to build on?,

 

& if it isn’t bread

& if it sure

ain’t tomatoes

 

it isn’t empty,

is it, like the signage

you walk by

 

that fronts

the Lakeside

Church of Practical

 

Christianity,

hawking

a knowledge of God

 

so modest

it seems trivial?,

& it isn’t ever,

 

is it, the how

to live it

so it doesn’t

 

kill you,

the where

to touch it,

 

the when

will genius

sing your name

 

so it sounds

like a place

you can live?

"
"

If I could

hold light

in my hand

 

I would

give it

to you

 

and watch it

become

your shadow.

"
"

His hand in hold so trigger-tight its blood

believes in ghosts. It clings with finger set

on steel and waits inside a dream of ducks.

The twilight burns into a rising arc

of eastern sky as sun reveals herself

too proud and instantly receives full-face

a splash of mallard flock. A shotgun blasts

the yellow into streaming pinks and gives

the creek its new-day taste of echoed blood.

Two green head ghosts fly through the pulse of dawn

upon a trigger’﻿s touch. The creek empties

of sound. In silence human fingers find

wet feet of web and carry in each hand

a bird whose only cry comes in color.

"
"

In the backyard

of my father’﻿s house

a hen’﻿s warm neck

once filled the center

of my pale fist.

Her place on the stump

still wears my shadow

like a stain.

"
"

You marched into the gray eyes of dawn

feeling older than the bones

that held their ground

like grazing, aged cattle

waiting, eyes closed to the wind,

on a winter, slaughter morning.

You searched through the fog for a sign,

but there was no sun to burn the way,

no burst of rainbow bridge

to keep you from the cattle call.

"
"

I never thought I’d keep a record of my pain

or happiness

like candles lighting the entire soft lace

of the air

around the full length of your hair/a shower

organized by God

in brown and auburn

undulations luminous like particles

of flame

 

But now I do

retrieve an afternoon of apricots

and water interspersed with cigarettes

and sand and rocks

we walked across:

                        How easily you held

my hand

beside the low tide

of the world

 

Now I do

relive an evening of retreat

a bridge I left behind

where all the solid heat

of lust and tender trembling

lay as cruel and as kind

as passion spins its infinite

tergiversations in between the bitter

and the sweet

 

Alone and longing for you

now I do

"
"

One day after another—

Perfect.

They all fit.

"
"

1

Who knew it’﻿﻿﻿s quite all right that I downed three

gin-and-tonics (can’﻿﻿﻿t fit male inside

female part on fanny pack) at four

o’﻿﻿﻿clock the Dyke March day of NY Pride?

Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy

and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt

in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-

ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops

whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,

lined up beside the march like S/M tops?

(They seem to think Gay Pride’﻿﻿﻿s this weekend’﻿﻿﻿s yawn.)

(Pit stop at McD’﻿﻿﻿s, can’﻿﻿﻿t clip pack back on.)

Who knew she’﻿﻿﻿d march beside me hand-in-hand

and who’﻿﻿﻿d expect me to remember names

when Liz’﻿﻿﻿s girlfriend saw us and waved “Hi.

It’﻿﻿﻿s . . . Anna”? (CNN shot feed, then frames.)

Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,

how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray

wondering: Is today today the day

she’﻿﻿﻿ll let me turn the key, lead her inside?

 

     2

Okay, I’﻿﻿﻿m sober now. Today is just

the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.

 

     3

Beside her isn’﻿﻿﻿t bad. Fan-stirred, the air

is humid and the theater is packed.

An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,

our leading ladies sweat it out in back.

A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.

My nose is in agreement. The perfume

from Queen Mother there could clear the room.

This shadow play across her face is fine.

Her arm’﻿﻿﻿s near mine, which means exactly nothing.

Hope’﻿﻿﻿s hope hums on through separate listening.

That skull, opaque to me as Midland’﻿﻿﻿s vault,

her silky crop, its pepper dabbed with salt —

I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.

Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.

 

     4. Les Nouvceaux from La Nouvelle Justine

I don’﻿﻿﻿t love her. She doesn’﻿﻿﻿t love me. Neither

does this waiter who may think it strange

when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age

on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.

I don’﻿﻿﻿t like sitting by her like wet cloth.

I don’﻿﻿﻿t like restaurants whose queers pawn sex

to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.

I don’﻿﻿﻿t like dining with my, well, not-ex,

both measuring the humid air for signs

of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.

I’﻿﻿﻿d rather have a knock-down, drag-out fight

that cleared the joint than watch another guy

get spanked by Corset Kris, who’﻿﻿﻿d like to grab

a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.

I’﻿﻿﻿d rather I were twice her age and wise.

I’﻿﻿﻿d spin cruel stories of past day of bliss

then give my own hands covert exercise

and send her home to bed without a kiss.

 

     5. L’﻿﻿﻿Addition

 

30 for the play and 10 for gins,

10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,

at least the metro home was freezer-cold,

at least the Broadway Local still had seats

at 96th, the local went express.

I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks

back to my solo digs for solo sex.

I got this poem for my 90 bucks.

"
"

Darkened not completely dark let us walk in the darkened field

trees in the field outlined against that which is less dark

under the trees are bushes with orange berries dark green leaves

not poetry’﻿﻿s mixing of yellow light blue sky darker than that

darkness of the leaves a modulation of the accumulated darkness

orange of the berries another modulation spreading out toward us

it is like the reverberation of a bell rung three times

like the call of a voice the call of a voice that is not there.

 

We will not look up how they got their name in a book of names

we will not trace the name’﻿﻿s root conjecture its first murmuring

the root of the berries their leaves is succoured by darkness

darkness like a large block of stone hauled on a wooden sled

like stone formed and reformed by a dark sea rolling in turmoil.

"
"

1

Not sweet sixteen not even sweet sixteen and she’﻿s moaning

not even sixteen years old and she’﻿﻿s moaning﻿

not even sweet sixteen and she’﻿s moaning the words

moaning out the words to “Precious Lord”

she says “ain’﻿t no harm to moan” and she’﻿s moaning

it’﻿s Aretha in the New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit in 1956

words moaned out so that she becomes denuded

no more little black dress she has nothing to hide

no more little black dress she has nothing left to hide.

 

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words and the music for “Precious Lord”

Thomas Dorsey aka Georgia Tom wrote other songs

one of the other songs “Deep Moaning Blues”

Thomas Dorsey: “I like the long moaning groaning tone”

Georgia Tom moaned “Deep Moaning Blues” with Ma Rainey

Georgia Tom and Ma Rainey moan they moan and groan

their moaning and groaning make you see

moaning and groaning you’﻿re made to see they have  nothing.

 

     2

The first time Mahalia does it as one interconnected phrase

she does it as three in one three words in one phrase

three in one: “take-en-n—my-ah-aah—ha-an-nd”

Mahalia does it in the same year in 1956 the same year as Aretha

same but different the second time it is more aggressive

it’﻿s more aggressive: “take-ake my-ah han-and”

Mahalia was a big fine woman Mahalia was denuded

she sang “Precious Lord” at the funeral of Martin Luther King

Aretha sang “Precious Lord” at the funeral of Mahalia.

 

Thomas Dorsey met Mahalia met her for the first time in 1928

it was in 1928 that Georgia Tom moaned with Ma Rainey

he moaned with Ma Rainey he moaned and he groaned with Ma Rainey

he met Mahalia and he taught her how to moan

“you teach them how to say their words in a moanful way”

to say their words how to say his words

Mahalia was a big fine woman Mahalia was denuded

Dorsey knew the heavier the voice the better the singer

Dorsey knew as any teacher knows the heavier the better.

 

     3

Al Green has a softened voice he has a voice made softened

he was made to sing softened by Willie Mitchell in 1972

softened and softened and softened

Al Green became Rev. Al Green of the Full Gospel Tabernacle in 1980

a tabernacle is a fixed or movable habitation

habitation where you stay together with the lord

Al Green has a softened voice he has a voice made softened

he was made to sing softened on “Let’﻿s Stay Together”

in 1982 he was made to sing softened on “Precious Lord.”

 

Photograph of Thomas Dorsey photograph of a smooth operator

photograph of Georgia Tom photo of a smooth operator

the photo smoothed out retouched softened

one side of the face completely light one side of the face all dark

one side merges into the light smoothed out softened

one side merges into the dark smoothed out made softened

in the photograph a smooth operator is lighting a cigarette

slender fingers hold a matchbox hold a match

slender fingers hold a softened flame against the softened dark.

     4

 

“Lead me” sing “lead me” they move with a repetitive rhythm

Dom Mocquereau: “rhythm is the ordering of the movement”

repetitive rhythm orders them to move on “lead”

they move with all their weight on “lead” it sounds like “feed”

it’﻿s the Soul Stirrers it’﻿s the most rhythmic music you ever heard

repetitive rhythm it sounds like “feed me”

S.R. Crain tenor A.L. Johnson baritone J.J. Farley bass

Edmond Jabè﻿s: “can we be healed by repetition?”

the Soul Stirrers move with a repetitive rhythm sing “feed me.”

 

Thomas Dorsey came to Chicago came looking for deliverance

Georgia Tom came in 1916 the Soul Stirrers in 1937

to get deliverance you have to wait on the movements of providence

he played piano he sang at buffet flats at rent parties

he was a smooth player and he sang softly

a smooth player they called him “the whispering piano player”

the most popular dance at the parties was the slow drag

he learned how to drag easy how to sing softly

how to drag easy how to wait on the movements of providence.

 

     5

Soul Stirrers move with a repetitive rhythm sing “feed me”

repetitive rhythm orders them to sing “feed me”

R.H. Harris sings lead he sings the essential word

R.H. Harris taught Sam Cooke and Sam Cooke taught Johnny Taylor

Johnny Taylor “Who’﻿﻿s Making Love” 1968

R.H. Harris: “they got a touch of me even if they don’﻿﻿t know me”

what they got a touch of touch of tongue love

R.H. Harris taught them to study the essential word

the word brings it to a picture it’﻿﻿s the lord making love.

 

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the essential word

wrote “precious” not “blessed” the essential word is “precious”

this was to be enshrined as a moment of epiphany

moment when he wrote the better-sounding word

moment of é﻿piphanie epiphania epiphano epiphaneia epiphanies

moment of epiphany essential word shining picture

Dorsey: “that thing like something hit me and went all over me”

that thing must be that same thing went all over him.

 

     6

Clara Ward’﻿﻿s real nasal her nasality makes her a real moaner

she moans the three in one three words in one word

she moans so that one word becomes three

one becomes three: “thru-uuu-uah”

double-clutches just like Aretha: “thru-ah thru-uuu-uah the night”

sounds just like Aretha because Aretha sounds just like her

Aretha followed Clara Ward note for moaning note

denuded Aretha followed denuded Clara

and did Aretha follow her to the lord to the lord to the light.

 

Thomas Dorsey was invited to Philadelphia by Gertrude Ward

Mrs. Gertrude Mae Murphy Ward the mother of Clara

in 1931 Mrs. Ward was told in a vision was told to go and to sing

Dorsey was invited to teach the Wards how to sing

how to say his words in a moanful way

Dorsey liked the long moaning groaning tone

Mrs. Ward was told in a vision a vision from the lord

Dorsey taught Clara and Clara taught Aretha

how to say his words in a moanful way all through the night.

 

     7

Sounds like “feed me” doesn’﻿﻿t sound like the Soul Stirrers

it’﻿﻿s not the Soul Stirrers it’﻿﻿s the Kings of Harmony

the Kings of Harmony with Carey Bradley on lead

Carey Bradley was taught by Silas Steele the first hard lead

Silas Steele sang lead for the Blue Jay Singers

those singers recorded the first quartet version of a Dorsey song

Silas Steele sang hard with a repetitive rhythm

question is can we be healed by repetition

over “feed me” Carey Bradley sings hard: “take-ah my hand.”

 

Blue Jay Singers the first quartet to record a Dorsey song

in 1931 those singers recorded “If You See My Saviour”

those singers: “if you see my saviour tell him that you saw me”

in 1931 Georgia Tom recorded “Please Mr. Blues”

Georgia Tom recorded in 1931 with Tampa Red

Georgia Tom and Tampa Red recorded a low moaning blues

“Please Mr. Blues” is a deep low-down moaning blues

those singers: “please be careful handle me like a child”

if you saw their saviour you would see Mr. Blues.

 

     8

Brother Joe May has a big voice has a big and loud voice

Brother Joe May the thunderbolt of the Middle West

the way he sang “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus” is like thunder

he was taught to sing “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus” by Mother Smith

he was taught to sing by Mother Willie Mae Ford Smith

she was called Mother he called her Mother

Mother Smith: “the lord just anoints me while I’﻿﻿m singing”

when you’﻿﻿re anointed something goes all over you

must be that same thng went all over her went all over her son.

 

Mrs. Willie May introduced “If You See My Saviour” in 1930

this was before she was called Mother

twenty years before Brother Joe May sang “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus”

in 1930 in Chicago at the National Baptist Convention

during the morning devotions at the convention

she sang “you saw me” during the morning devotions

in 1930 in Chicago Georgia Tom recorded “She Can Love So Good”

in 1931 in Chicago Georgia Tom recorded “Please Mr. Blues”

if you saw her you’﻿﻿d see Mr. Blues loving her so good.

 

     9

Way past sixteen way past sweet sixteen and she’﻿﻿s moaning

she says “when I don’﻿﻿t feel like singing I moan”

it’﻿﻿s Sister Rosetta Tharpe at The Hot Club de France in 1966

Sister Rosetta had dyed her hair red played a hollow-body jazz guitar

Sister Rosetta has a resonating vibrato

she moans “ho-oo-oo-oo-meh” with a resonat﻿ing vibrato

she moans out “ho-oo-oo-oo-meh” becomes resonant

“when I don’﻿﻿﻿﻿t feel like singing I moan”

she becomes completely resonant she has nothing left to hide.

 

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music

Thomas Dorsey wrote the words and the music for “Precious Lord”

the song is an answer song to another song

answer to George Nelson Allen’﻿﻿﻿s “Must Jesus Bear the Cross Alone?”

George Nelson Allen thought the answer was no

a cross for everyone “there’﻿﻿﻿s a cross for everyone”

Thomas Dorsey thought the answer was no

“see you got to be susceptible for whatever comes in the ear”

he got Sister Rosetta to be susceptible got everyone susceptible.

"
"



     1

Those who hear the train they had better worry worry

those who hear they had better worry worry.

 

     2

No disgrace to worry to have the worried life blues

might do some good to be worried in the hour of our need.

 

     3

Run run run away going to run run run away

there are those who think they’﻿re going to run away.

 

     4

To hear and to be facing and to be facing what is heard

to hear and to be face to face with what is heard.

 

     5

Run run run away they’﻿re going to run run run away

there are those who think they’﻿re going to run away from the train.

 

     6

Fort built to protect the community from desert raiders

community thought to protect itself from raiders.

 

     7

Those who hear the train they had better worry worry

better worry worry about a gift of tears.

 

     8

Those who are gathered in the fort had better learn

they had better learn how to cure their wounds.

 

     9

The train with its poison and its tongue

the lurking train with its poison and its tongue.

 

     10

Those who are gathered better learn to be insensitive

learn how to put on a show of being insensitive.

 

     11

Danger of its poison and of its tongue

danger of its poison and of its tongue against our teeth.

 

     12

Had better break the habit the habit of prayer

better let the jokes come back to us when we’﻿re at prayer.

 

     13

What really kills me is standing in the need of prayer

standing in a gathering in the need of prayer.

 

     14

Don’﻿t if we don’﻿t if we don’﻿t break the habit

we will be made to climb all the steps of the ladder.

 

     15

Brood over someone else’﻿s dream: three-story red tower

beneath the tower the train is always departing.

 

     16

Danger of its tongue for those gathered like a group

gathered like a group of all virgins with their downcast eyes.

 

     17

There is this problem with cutting off the prayer hand

there is this problem with the other hand.

 

     18

How insensitive is how those who hear better be

how insensitive how unmoved and cold they had better be.

 

     19

You can call him you can call him up and ask him

if we had only asked for “Sleep Walk by Santo & Johnny.

 

     20

Red tower green sky three-story tower against green sky

beneath the tower the train is always departing.

 

     21

Don’﻿﻿t break it be made to climb all the steps

we don’t break it we’﻿﻿ll be made to climb all the steps.

 

     22

Ant on the floor the small ant on the kitchen floor

the small ant anticipates by sound or shadow.

 

     23

Light turns out in the kitchen when somebody pulls on the string

those gathered not able to anticipate the danger.

 

     24

If we had only stayed in the school of the prophets

in the school of the prophets who catch thoughts from words.

     25

Ant on the floor the small ant on the kitchen floor

those gathered not able to anticipate the danger.

 

     26

Those who are gathered are fondled and taken by the hand

taken by the hand and made to climb all the steps.

 

     27

Perfectly built fort bound to make the community unhappy

bound to make those in the community unhappy.

 

     28

What really kills me is standing in the need of prayer

I’﻿﻿m standing in the need of jokes that come back.

 

     29

Standing in the need of prayer in a perfectly built fort

bound to make you unhappy bound to make me unhappy.

 

     30

Not broken the habit of prayer not been broken

those who are gathered better learn how to cure their wounds.

"
"







        Love comes in spurts.                    


             RICHARD HELL & THE VOIDOIDS









     1

And goes is gone

cause for mourning head

in hands in tears gonna be a long long wait for the resurrection

of the dead.

 

There are birds there is birdsong

unmourning and unmournful at sunrise in the white light

there is a garden with high walls around it

jardin de plaisir

of mint and lavender of hyssop in hedges glassy beads of water on velvet leaves

purple-flaked lupin spikes above velvet pulmonaria

there is a gardener la belle jardinière bare-breasted and bare-footed

bouquets

of all flowers in her arms and woven in her hair.

 

     2

And it hurts not good but

bad

to see a man head in hands in tears it breaks you up

to see a man come down in tears.

 

There are birds there is birdsong

having come through hunger and danger

there is free song

a free weaving of many songs

song against song and other songs clustered/spun out in a blending of wavy pitches

tant

doucement the phrase means what the songs mean

freshness

that meaning so sweetly and freely as a gardener weaves flowers in her hair.

 

     3

Can we stay in the weave of

that meaning can we/should we attempt to stay to linger

in a pleasure garden everlasting dream of

love tomorrow its unseen/secret structure when our time remains a

bad time and what time wasn’﻿﻿t

bad

wasn’﻿﻿t and isn’﻿﻿t a time of hunger and danger of young men and older men

in tears our time a time

of terror and counterterror can

we/should

we our

time remaining a really bad time a really down and dirty time

of terror what

walls do not fall and who says they have no fear.

 

     4

And boo-hoo-hoo

like dolls

hurts breaks you up like dolls get broken the visible human

the visibly spastic plastic.

 

There are birds there is birdsong

unmourning and unmournful having come through

there is a garden with swept gravel paths

dream designed/bel et bon designed connecting and interconnecting

non brisé﻿

where men and women are in contemplation in conversation in

one another’﻿﻿s eyes

there is a gardener holding her bouquets and holding her skirts like the light like

so sweetly woven song like love never for sale.

"
"

How long will the bed that we made together

hold us there? ﻿Your stubbled cheeks grazed my skin﻿

from evening to dawn, a cloud of scattered

particles now, islands of shaving foam

slowly spiraling down the drain, blood drops

stippling the water pink as I kiss

the back of your neck, our faces framed inside

a medicine cabinet mirror. The blade

of your hand carves a portal out of steam,

the two of us like boys behind frosted glass

who wave goodbye while a car shoves off

into winter. All that went unnoticed

till now — empty cups of coffee stacked up

in the sink, the neighborhood kids

up to their necks in mounds of autumn leaves.

How months on a kitchen calendar drop

like frozen flies, the flu season at its peak

followed by a train of magic-markered

xxx’﻿﻿﻿s — nights we’﻿﻿﻿d spend apart. Death must work

that way, a string of long distance calls

that only gets through to the sound of your voice

on our machine, my heart’﻿﻿﻿s mute confession

screened out. How long before we turn away

from flowers altogether, your blind hand

reaching past our bedridden shoulders

to hit that digital alarm at delayed

intervals — till you shut it off completely.

"
"

I went to my mother’s room at 13

past midnight, and told her I was dying.

I’d wet the bed, I’d had this crazy dream,

about a sexy neighbor I’d been spying

on. Well, I didn’t tell her that. I mean,

the day before she asked who I was eyeing

when I didn’t want to go outside

for ice cream. The truck was parked out front,

and she was buying, but I couldn’t join

the other screaming kids —

not with Lance applying suntan lotion

to his muscled teenage skin.

Stretched out on a beach towel

in his front yard, his body mystified me,

while mine seemed happy to defy me.

My dick would tent my cut-offs

at the sight of him.

I wore two pair of underwear,

but even then I thought I’d burst

right through the seams.

So I didn’t dare tell mother what I’d dreamed,

though she did think to ask me.

I’d have been a fool to tell her that.

She thought my blush was any boy’s,

puzzling out his sexuality, but I swear it was

as much because the fantasies

were always other boys.

some from my baseball team,

some the roughnecks at school,

but usually Lance. He was flying

naked in the dream I had that night,

the one that made me think that God

was mad and killing me. I was lying

(also naked — and hard as cinder block)

on the beach towel I’d seen him lay

across the grass the day before.

I tried to understand the signs implying

I might turn into some kind of freaky thing.

But it would have been cruel to tell my mother that,

especially when she was already crying,

and trying not to laugh at the same time,

when I showed her what came out of me.

She apologized for throwing such a scene,

said I was growing up to be a man, that’s all it meant,

said it was normal for a boy my age’s thing

to start uprising like a metal beam.

She apologized again

that I didn’t have my dad around to train

an 11-year old boy in the ways of puberty.

I was as stupefied as I’ve ever been.

She never mentioned him.

And I have never turned a deeper red

than I did then, at 26 past midnight,

when my mother helped me change my sheets,

and said the next day she’d teach me to wash them.

And then she said she’d ask the man across the street

to talk to me. Would that be okay?

Or would I feel more comfortable

with someone younger, like his son?

"
"

1.

 

It wasn’﻿t over a woman that war began, but it’﻿s better

To see it this way, my myth professor loved to say, a man

From the South rumored to extort the bodies of college girls

Into higher grades. My girlfriend of the time told me so —

 

He was a creep, she

Got an A in the class and liked his joke about religion

As self-mutilation, it was Ramadan then and, O Helen,

I was fasting. I lie awake in a desert night east

 

Of the Atlantic on the verge of rain, the catapulted grains

Of sand on hot zinc roof, the rustle of leaves, the flap

Of peeling bark on trees whose names I do not know, and where

Would I find a botany guide here. Water flowed

 

Like a river from the Jabal once.

There were elephant pools, alligator

Streams, and a pond for the devil to speak in human tongues.

All desiccant names now after an earthquake

 

Shuffled the ground decades ago. It will rain soon,

I’﻿m assured, since nothing has stopped

The birds from migration. All the look-alikes

Are already here: the stork, the heron.

 

The white flying flowers, the ibis, and the one

That aesthetizes you more.

"
"

At a desk made of glass,

In a glass walled-room

With red airport carpet,

 

An officer asked

My father for fingerprints,

And my father refused,

 

So another offered him tea

And he sipped it. The teacup

Template for fingerprints.

 

My father says, it was just

Hot water with a bag.

My father says, in his country,

 

Because the earth knows

The scent of history,

It gave the people sage.

 

I like my tea with sage

From my mother’﻿s garden,

Next to the snapdragons

 

She calls fishmouths

Coming out for air. A remedy

For stomach pains she keeps

 

In the kitchen where

She always sings.

First, she is Hagar

 

Boiling water

Where tea is loosened.

Then she drops

 

In it a pinch of sage

And lets it sit a while.

She tells a story:

 

The groom arrives late

To his wedding

Wearing only one shoe.

 

The bride asks him

About the shoe. He tells her

He lost it while jumping

 

Over a house-wall.

Breaking away from soldiers.

She asks:

 

Tea with sage

Or tea with mint?

 

With sage, he says,

Sweet scent, bitter tongue.

She makes it, he drinks.

"
"

Between what should and what should not be

Everything is liable to explode. Many times

I was told who has no land has no sea. My father

Learned to fly in a dream. This is the story

Of a sycamore tree he used to climb

When he was young to watch the rain.

 

Sometimes it rained so hard it hurt. Like being

Beaten with sticks. Then the mud would run red.

 

My brother believed bad dreams could kill

A man in his sleep, he insisted

We wake my father from his muffled screams

On the night of the day he took us to see his village.

No longer his village he found his tree amputated.

Between one falling and the next

 

There’﻿s a weightless state. There was a woman

Who loved me. Asked me how to say tree

In Arabic. I didn’﻿t tell her. She was sad. I didn’﻿t understand.

When she left. I saw a man in my sleep three times. A man I knew

Could turn anyone into one-half reptile.

I was immune. I thought I was. I was terrified of being

 

The only one left. When we woke my father

He was running away from soldiers. Now

He doesn’﻿t remember that night. He laughs

About another sleep, he raised his arms to strike a king

And tried not to stop. He flew

But mother woke him and held him for an hour,

 

Or half an hour, or as long as it takes a migration inward.

Maybe if I had just said it.Shejerah, she would’﻿ve remembered me longer. Maybe

I don’﻿t know much about dreams

But my mother taught me the law of omen. The dead

Know about the dying and sometimes

Catch them in sleep like the sycamore tree

My father used to climb

 

When he was young to watch the rain stream,

And he would gently swing.

"
"

The rice field birds are too clever for scarecrows,

They know what they love, milk in the grain.

 

When it happens, there will be no time to look for anyone.

Husband, children, nine brothers and sisters.

 

You will drop your sugarcane-stick-beating of plastic bucket,

Stop shouting at birds and run.

 

They will load you in trucks and herd you for a hundred miles.

Old men will teach you trade with soldiers at checkpoints.

 

You will give them your spoon, blanket and beans,

They’﻿﻿﻿﻿ll let you keep your life. And if you jump off the truck,

 

The army jeep trailing it will run you over.

Later, they will accuse you of giving up your land.

 

Later, you will stand in distribution lines and won’﻿﻿﻿t receive enough to eat.

Your mother will weave you new underwear from flour sacks.

 

And they’﻿﻿﻿ll give you plastic tents, cooking pots,

Vaccine cards, white pills, and wool blankets.

 

And you will keep your cool.

Standing with eyes shut tight like you’﻿﻿﻿ve got soap in them.

 

Arms stretched wide like you’﻿﻿﻿re catching rain.

"
"

1.

Here, shooting stars linger

They give out

A sparkling trail like a cauterized incision

 

Silver, or amber

If the moon is low and rising red

 

 

2.

And the rain melts the roads

And the roads

Can rupture a spleen

Or oust a kidney stone

 

As for the heart

It needs a beginning

The narrative

Burden of events

 

 

3.

“Mize, zey eat mize”

The Frenchman exclaimed with a smile

“Rraized and shipped from za States”

 

We raise rats! I thought

That’﻿s a lot of protein!

 

“Maize maize!” it was, after our chickens

Have had their fill

 

 

4.

She was the only nurse in town before the war

She spoke seven languages and died suddenly

He was a merchant

He’﻿s a doorman now and buys us cigarettes

 

 

5.

Here we are with love pouring out of every orifice

Here they are dancing

Around the funeral pyre, the corpse in absentia

 

 

6.

One of the drivers ran over the neighbor’﻿s ducks

The neighbor demanded compensation

For the post-traumatic stress disorder he accurately anticipates

 

Do you know what it’﻿s like

To drive on roads occupied

By animal farms: you cannot tell

Who killed who or how

Many ducks were there to begin with

 

 

7.

In the morning, elephant grass moves the way

Mist is visible in the breeze but doesn’﻿t dampen the skin

 

 

8.

Today, I yelled at three old women

Who wouldn’﻿t stop bargaining for pills they didn’﻿t need

One wanted extra

For her grandson who came along for the ride

 

 

9.

Like lip sores

The asphalt blisters in the rain

 

And the boys

Fill the holes with dirt and gravel

And broken green branches

Then wait:

 

No windex. No flowers or newspapers

And gratuity is appreciated

 

 

10.

“I have ants in my leg”

And “My leg went to sleep”

Are not the same thing!

 

The French argue

There is no sleep in a tingling numbness

The symptom of sluggish blood:

 

I agree. Me too my leg has been anted

And we are learning to reconcile

The dark with the electric

 

 

11.

Four days the river runs to the border

Nine days to learn it wasn’﻿t the shape

Of your nose that gave you away

And debts are paid off in a-shelter-for-a-day

 

A pile of wood plus change in your pocket

Is a sack of potatoes and change in another’﻿s

 

 

12.

No more running long or short distance

The old women

Snicker at me when I pass them by

 

 

13.

She was comatose post-partum

And the beekeeper

Bathed her in love everyday

 

When she recovered I gave up

What he’﻿d promised me for the woman

Who took up nursing their newborn

Since as coincidence would have it

Her name was Om Assel — Mother of Honey

 

 

14.

The translation of a medical interview

Is not a poem to be written

 

Come recite a verse from childhood with meI see you’﻿re unable to weep, does loveHave no command over you? The sea’﻿s like the desertNeither quenches the thirst

 

 

15.

Here, dry grass burns the moon

Here, a clearing of grass is a clearing of snakes

 

 

16.

And the rain has already been cleansed from the sky

The clinic is empty, soon

The earth will unseal like a jar

Harvest is the season that fills the belly

 

 

17.

Here, I ride my bicycle invisible

Except for a crescent shadow and the Milky Way

Is already past

 

 

18.

And a mirror gives the moon back to the moon

Home is an epilogue:

 

Which came first

Memory or words?

"
"

I spent a night turning in bed,

my love was a feather, a flat

 

sleeping thing. She was

very white

 

and quiet, and above us on

the roof, there was another woman I

 

also loved, had

addressed myself to in

 

a fit she

returned. That

 

encompasses it. But now I was

lonely, I yelled,

 

but what is that? Ugh,

she said, beside me, she put

 

her hand on

my back, for which act

 

I think to say this

wrongly.

"
"

Tonight, nothing is long enough—

time isn’﻿t.

Were there a fire,

it would burn now.

 

Were there a heaven,

I would have gone long ago.

I think that light

is the final image.

 

But time reoccurs,

love—and an echo.

A time passes

love in the dark.

"
"

All night the sound had

come back again,

and again falls

this quiet, persistent rain.

 

What am I to myself

that must be remembered,

insisted upon

so often? Is it

 

that never the ease,

even the hardness,

of rain falling

will have for me

 

something other than this,

something not so insistent—

am I to be locked in this

final uneasiness.

 

Love, if you love me,

lie next to me.

Be for me, like rain,

the getting out

 

of the tiredness, the fatuousness, the semi-

lust of intentional indifference.

Be wet

with a decent happiness.

"
"







To Flossie









II



1




       Why go further? One might conceivably rectify the rhythm, study all out and arrive at the perfection of a tiger lily or a china doorknob. One might lift all out of the ruck, be a worthy successor to—the man in the moon. Instead of breaking the back of a willing phrase why not  try to follow the wheel through—approach death at a walk, take in all the scenery. There﻿’﻿s as much reason one way as the other and then—one never knows—perhaps we’﻿ll bring back Eurydice—this time!   _______________

 ﻿     Between two contending forces there may at all times arrive that moment when the stress is equal on both sides so that with a great pushing a great stability results giving a picture of perfect rest. And so it may be that once upon the way the end drives back upon the beginning and a stoppage will occur. At such a time the poet shrinks from the doom that is calling him forgetting the delicate rhythms of perfect beauty, preferring in his mind the gross buffetings of good and evil fortune.2


       Ay dio! I would say so much were it not for the tunes changing, changing, darting so many ways. One step and the cart’﻿s left you sprawling. Here’﻿s the way! and—you’﻿re hip bogged. And there’﻿s blame of the light too: when eyes are humming birds who’﻿ll tie them with a lead string? But it’﻿s the tunes they want most,—send them skipping out at the tree tops. Whistle then! who’﻿d stop the leaves swarming; curving down the east in their braided jackets? Well enough—but there’﻿s small comfort in naked branches when the heart’﻿s not set that way.________________  

     A man’﻿s desire is to win his way to some hilltop. But against him seem to swarm a hundred jumping devils. These are his constant companions, these are the friendly images which he has invented out of his mind and which are inviting him to rest and to disport himself according to hidden reasons. The man being half a poet is cast down and longs to rid himself of his torment and his tormentors.  3


       When you hang your clothes on the line you do not expect to see the line broken and them trailing in the mud. Nor would you expect to keep your hands clean by putting them in a dirty pocket. However and of course if you are a market man, fish, cheeses and the like going under your fingers every minute in the hour you would not leave off the business and expect to handle a basket of fine laces without at least mopping yourself on a towel, soiled as it may be. Then how will you expect a fine trickle of words to follow you through the intimacies of this dance without—oh, come let us walk together into the air awhile first. One must be watchman to much secret arrogance before his ways are tuned to these measures. You see there is a dip of the ground between us. You think you can leap up from your gross caresses of these creatures and at a gesture fling it all off and step out in silver to my finger tips. Ah, it is not that I do not wait for you, always! But my sweet fellow—you have broken yourself without purpose, you are—Hark! it is the music! Whence does it come? What! Out of the ground? Is it this that you have been preparing for me? Ha, goodbye, I have a rendezvous in the tips of three birch sisters. Encouragez vos musiciens! Ask them to play faster. I will return—later. Ah you are kind.—and I? must dance with the wind, make my own snow flakes, whistle a contrapuntal melody to my own fugue! Huzza then, this is the dance of the blue moss bank! Huzza then, this is the mazurka of the hollow log! Huzza then, this is the dance of rain in the cold trees. 

"
"

I walked in the house

on the flat aspect of the wood

I took rectangular instruction of the wood

 

when I walked I turned at the wall

and on the flat I moved steadily

 

unimpeded, not tumbling, climbing or short of breath.

I walked in ease on the flat.

 

 

 

                                                              Something electric charged into our account

and zinged out of it, pre-instructed

 

and paid for the house. I felt

house on my heel then instep and toe.

I had a bad foot and I paid

to get it fixed so I could walk here.

I paid for the house and I paid for the

foot that touches it. I paid to be

directed rectangularly and down a hall.

I curved my body to direct

my waste through a hole. I am helped

and paying for it.

 

all of me exchanged,

housing exchange.

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                   I saw us standing

   up in the world.

And we sank into

   exchange

  vibrating transparency

                 like a sea nettle

              afloat in the night sea

 

the edges of the sea-veil

      tensed slapping above, visible

when the wind crevassed and doilied

 

 

                                                           If there is a ceiling to exchange

                                                                        and above it sky

                                                          I don’t can’t see it and I don’t know why

                                                                        I want it

                                                               above my house which is crystalline gel edges

 

                 because the whole world’s disappeared

                                                                                              viewed as exchange

 

 

 

 

 

 

I broke my arm and the window

integrally to exchange.

 

I paid someone to fix me and improve

the window, triple-glazing it, and warmer

I rebounded       knit in knit up.

All parties to the event’s aftermath

                     were paid.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Suppose I did not go in pain

                   to hospital, did not visit and revisit

for x-rays, left the window smashed

                  and sat here by it,

            stuck up

                among the crystalline

                            and cold.

I was painful and determined

not to play, and with the other unemployed

weighed —

 

                       the ghostship

sagged with holes.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                          —So you want to be a thing outside exchange?

 

                                              Drain out the dying bath

                                              see what color you are?

 

 

 

 

 

The coin changed hands

 

 

identical      with a will

to transact.

"
"

Please god love me and buy me

 

Read this hillock and ride me

Wraith typing all day for money.

 

God bought me today for two silver fish in a can

God bought me tomorrow for bland in a pan

and a card an email from Rebecca

 

Bought four hours of my control alt delete shut down

Bought a new day-section with a headstand

 

My commerce in shall

 

Sky like a grandstand

Transact

 

God performed me today for a half minute

lucky

in locker room hiding my boobs from the kids

and my hair is silky and my mane shot silk gold

 

Bought a book on economy

Georgie Bataille

Called about plane tickets

Georgie Bataille

I bought my debt today

Georgie Bataille hooray

Debt off my God today

 

God off my debt in a macular hole

 

I dream of an end like a fount to this night

Run thinner and thinner and then it’﻿s all light

Macerated in signal

 

by my go

 

I bought my ghost I walk my ghost

"
"

Raise up your back like an insect on the face of the nation

He took Miss Mousie on his knee, O say

little mouse will you marry me?

Getting hair cut this morning illegally

I can’﻿t afford it

Fourteen fifteen I depend on you and roiling unlap this morn

The mind refrigerated all night

Now to clarify the broth skim off the oil & swallow it is your oil

I must have it shorter so it grows longer in unison

A glory and stern grandeur, which men silently gazed on with wonder

    and tears

"
"

I am      Invested in

by a      Huge Fund

Heavy                    highquality

furniture

Sense of heavy

Addiction glossy pleasance

 

I was lying  Down on a yoga mat

 My bones

basketing air     Barely draped in

skin

the basket             Effulged by local

Air      Highquality        scented

humid air

to support          My orchid        Skin

 

Suffuged in this Air

expense I nearly

floated  Who was my  Body

 

I am comfortable I am

comfortable     Flying my spirit

 

On a long leash

She is            in the wind

   I am in the     belle

belle jar

shellacked and        brittle

  begins to      ding

 

 

How can I      From inside this comfort

 

Represent      Hope to

 

No no

 

I am                 Too tempted

 

To think I            Deserve it

                     Rigidly and with effort

 

know my privilege

 

 

 

I know my fluorescent doorway

 

A rectangle   Among the ceiling tiles

 

Ordinary flecked coated  1) foam rectangles

 

and one hard white light regularly rubbled

 2) glass rectangle

 

 these are my choices

the

 

     ceiling tile                      I would tear

in                         behind the

       Ugly lattice to the   Duct area

   Unscrew the grille    Smallen myself

Into the dark cold  Square pipe

    To share  My cold  What is in

       My basket    Bone-basket

              With the other      breathers/Workers

 

Or through the fluorescent door

 

 Means giving up   On going   behind

the lattice.

 

 

All that’s allowed   Through the flow light

 

Is what   Is shined upon

 

The light bends looking at my   Skin

and hair   and   green blouse

 

       When I concentrate  The light bending

All at once         Hooks my outsides

 

Hooks them into itself

 

             Now I am

     absent that

 

I am not / shined upon

 

     very small        dusty

 

     lizardlike   a  toad    a  turd

 

   on a tabletop     corner

And the outside of that is hooked away

 

         wow my parents

 

hooked away           People

 

on the street   skin and clothing

 

    hung on hangers

 

  from    electric wires

 

blooming and twisting    swells of breeze

 

leave behind             on the street

a fair       weather

 

an easy            weather

walk-through

 

 

I think I’m better    than the walk-throughs

    because something is left of me

 

that’s what I     think I must

  be wrong to     think so

 

 

 

               Would you like to    Eat at my house

 

Fill up your              Walk-through

 

You drive through               Fill it up with

 

tea and sheets

  water from the toilet

 

These could    be your eyebrows

                                       [crayons]

 

these could be your knees, these coasters

 

                  What could                be your inside?

 

   Paper       wadded paper

      It says something

 

What about              Something sticky

       For your mouth             Honey

 

Then we will read you      For dinner

 

 

 

In my  transitional housing    [dirt ball toad]

 

   I picked myself apart   With a fork

  Connected a wire      Where my belly was

                                         Coiled up   the plug

           The prongs poke hurt

 

This is the part        Light plugs

        into           My/The outside plugs

into             To light up

 

The    shine    is    from    unshiny

 

 

  sewn in place with the little

     Light hooks     Made a case for me

Visible

 

 

   so I retaliated

Against the hooks

 

I was    trying       My lizard turd

   was trying    to    join the other

 

Mud

 

 

my thrashing         harnessed

motored

made the light

 

 

 

Meanwhile       My toad

absorbed

pollution

 

from the walkthroughs       High empty

thoughts      Funneled   backchannel

 

Won’t you be mine [mind]         Be my thought

softening                   the rockmud

 

 

 

I will reorient  now          I will claymation

That is a scary    Gingerbready

 

 

    mud man

  walking          You can’t catch me       hole for

                        Your thoughts

   tunneled invisible     Unreflecting

 unrepresenter

Not wrapped

 

 

 

The Sun is here    Also   later and at

  the same time   the sun burned

    up and we revolved

 

around it dirt rock

 

    warm   dirt rock

 

    in the dark                     of coursing

    around the dark

 

I have made myself the center of

 

     the galaxy

I am very important to myself

 

  must lose this

 

visibility

 

The shine is off

 

perspect while kicking

 

Where do you      think they get the lights from?

 

   Burn it up, burn up all the fuel

into furious dirt

 

     Nematodes

don’t need light

 

When I am in a room with forest

It is not that myself comes home to myself

 

   Selva oscura,  ya

 

     Obsecurity of self

 

      I considered long and seriously before

 

           I was bornt

 

      I stood on the street

 

    With the hookers

 

Who were selling

 

Disappear into a hole

 

 Into Mama

 

    but come back out.

 

   Go in, boys.

 

   Go in and stay there.

"
"

Amazing the mood it's put me in.

And the sky's tint at this hour—out

on my own, occasional hum or zip

of a car, August the summer month

half the city splashes about

the Mediterranean, or north:

the beach at Donostia a jewel

—its Paseo the lip of a shell to walk.

It's hearing you what really pulls

me in, soft this interior punch,

recalling the sheen of your brow—we'd talk

with our limbs, the Liffey below, have lunch...

Re-lived this evening on the phone;

the pitch of your Dublin tone.

                              Madrid

"
"

Little paper cuds we made by ripping the corners or edges from homework and class notes then ruminating them into balls we’d flick from our fingertips or catapult with pencils or (sometimes after lunch) launch through striped straws like deadly projectiles toward the necks of enemies and any other target where they’d stick with the tiniest splat, I hope you’re still there, stuck to unreachable ceilings like the beginnings of nests by generations of wasps too ignorant to finish them or under desktops with blunt stalactites of chewing gum, little white words we learned to shape and hold in our mouths while waiting to let them fly, our most tenacious utterance.

"
"

Out in the orchards the dogs stoodAlmost frozen in the bleak spring night & Mister dragged out into the rows Between his peach trees the old dry limbsBuilding at regular intervals careful pyres While the teeth of the dogs chattered & snapped & the ice began to hang long as whiskersFrom the globes along the branches & at his signal we set the piles of branches ablaze Tending each carefully so as not to scorchThe trees as we steadily fed those flames Just enough to send a rippling glow along Those acres of orchard where that body—Sister Winter—had been held so wisely to the fire

"
"

                                         I. We are as clouds that veil the midnight moon;     How restlessly they speed and gleam and quiver,Streaking the darkness radiantly! yet soonNight closes round, and they are lost for ever:—                                         II.Or like forgotten lyres whose dissonant strings    Give various response to each varying blast,To whose frail frame no second motion brings    One mood or modulation like the last.                                        III.We rest—a dream  has power to poison sleep;     We rise—one wandering thought pollutes the day;We feel, conceive or reason, laugh or weep,Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away:—                                       IV.It is the same!—For, be it joy or sorrow,    The path of its departure still is free;Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;    Nought may endure but Mutability.

"
"

XXVII   1


       This particular thing, whether it be four pinches of four divers white powders cleverly compounded to cure surely, safely, pleasantly a painful twitching of the eyelids or say a pencil sharpened at one end, dwarfs the imagination, makes logic a butterfly, offers a finality that sends us spinning through space, a fixity the mind could climb forever, a revolving mountain, a complexity with a surface of glass; the gist of poetry. D.C. al fin. 2


       There is no thing that with a twist of the imagination cannot be something else. Porpoises risen in a green sea, the wind at nightfall bending the rose-red grasses and you—in your apron running to catch—say it seems to you to be your son. How ridiculous! You will pass up into a cloud and look back at me, not count the scribbling foolish that puts wings to your heels, at your knees.  3


       Sooner or later as with the leaves forgotten the swinging branch long since and summer: they scurry before a wind on the frost-baked ground—have no place to rest—somehow invoke a burst of warm days not of the past nothing decayed: crisp summer!—neither a copse for resurrected frost eaters but a summer removed   undestroyed a summer of dried leaves scurrying with a screech, to and fro in the half dark—twittering, chattering, scraping. Hagh!  ________________


      Seeing the leaves dropping from the high and low branches the thought rise: this day of all others is the one chosen, all other days fall away from it on either side and only itself remains in perfect fullness. It is its own summer, of its leaves as they scrape on the smooth ground it must build its perfection. The gross summer of the year is only a halting counterpart of those fiery days of secret triumph which in reality themselves paint the year as if upon a parchment, giving each season a mockery of the warmth or frozenness which is within ourselves. The true seasons blossom or wilt not in fixed order but so that many of them may pass in a few weeks or hours whereas sometimes a whole life passes and the season remains of a piece from one end to the other.﻿

"
"

XXII   1


       This is a slight stiff dance to a waking baby whose arms have been lying curled back above his head upon the pillow, making a flower—the eyes closed. Dead to the world! Waking is a little hand brushing away dreams. Eyes open. Here’﻿﻿﻿s a new world.     _______________

 ﻿     There is nothing the sky-serpent will not eat. Sometimes it stops to gnaw Fujiyama, sometimes to slip its long and softly clasping tongue about the body of a sleeping child who smiles thinking its mother is lifting it.  2


     Security, solidity—we laugh at them in our clique. It is tobacco to us, this side of her leg. We put it in our samovar and make tea of it. You see the stuff has possibilities. You think you are opposing the rich but the truth is you’﻿﻿﻿re turning toward authority yourself, to say nothing of religion. No, I do not say it means nothing. Why everything is nicely adjusted to our moods. But I would rather describe to you what I saw in the kitchen last night—overlook the girl a moment: there over the sink (1) this saucepan holds all, (2) this colander holds most, (3) this wire sieve lets most go and (4) this funnel holds nothing. You appreciate the progression. What need then to be always laughing? Quit phrase making—that is, not of course—but you will understand me or if not—why—come to breakfast sometime around evening on the fourth of January any year you please; always be punctual where eating is concerned. ________________


      My little son’﻿﻿﻿s improvisations exceed min: a round stone to him’﻿﻿﻿s a loaf of bread or “this hen could lay a dozen golden eggs.” Birds fly about his bedstead; giants lean over him with hungry jaws; bears roam the farm by summer and are killed and quartered at a thought. There are interminable stories at eating time full of bizarre imagery, true grotesques, pigs that change to dogs in the telling, cows that sing, roosters that become mountains and oceans that fill a soup plate. There are groans and growls, dun clouds and sunshine mixed in a huge phantasmagoria that never rests, never ceased to unfold into—the day’﻿﻿﻿s poor little happenings. Not that alone. He has music which I have not. His tunes follow no scale, no rhythm—alone the mood in odd ramblings up and down, over and over with a rigor of invention that rises beyond the power to follow except in some more obvious flight. Never have I heard so crushing a critique as those desolate inventions, involved half-hymns, after his first visit to a Christian Sunday school.      3


       This song is to Phyllis! By this deep snow I know it’﻿﻿﻿s springtime, not ring time! Good God no! The screaming brat’﻿﻿﻿s a sheep bleating, the rattling crib-side sheep shaking a bush. We are young! We are happy! says Colin. What’﻿﻿﻿s an icy room and the sun not up? This song is to Phyllis. Reproduction lets death in, says Joyce. Rot, say I. to Phyllis this song is!  ________________


      That which is known has value only by virtue of the dark. This cannot be otherwise. A thing known passes out of the mind into the muscles, the will is quit of it, save only when set into vibration by the forces of darkness opposed to it. ﻿

"
"

XIV1


       The brutal Lord of All will rip us from each other—leave the one to suffer here alone. No need belief in god or hell to postulate that much. The dance: hands touching, leaves touching—eyes looking, clouds rising—lips touching, cheeks touching, arm about . . . Sleep. Heavy head, heavy arm, heavy dream—: Of Ymir’﻿﻿s flesh the earth was made and of his thoughts were all the gloomy clouds created. Oya!  ________________


      Out of bitterness itself the clear wine of the imagination will be pressed and the dance prosper thereby.  2


       To you! whoever you are, wherever you are! (But I know where you are!) There’﻿﻿s Dü﻿rer’﻿﻿s “Nemesis” naked on her sphere over the little town by the river—except she’﻿﻿s too old. There’﻿﻿﻿s a dancing burgess by Tenier and Villon’﻿﻿﻿s maitresse—after he’﻿﻿﻿d gone bald and was skin pocked and toothless: she that had him ducked in the sewage drain. Then there’﻿﻿﻿s that miller’﻿﻿﻿s daughter of “buttocks broad and breastes high.” Something of Nietzsche, something of the good Samaritan, something of the devil himself,—can cut a caper of a fashion, my fashion! Hey you, the dance! Squat. leap. Hips to the left. Chin—ha!—sideways! Stand up, stand up ma bonne! you’﻿﻿﻿ll break my backbone. So again!—and so forth till we’﻿﻿﻿re sweat soaked.  ________________


      Some fools once were listening to a poet reading his poem. It so happened that the words of the thing spoke of gross matters of the everyday world such as are never much hidden from a quick eye. Out of these semblances, and borrowing certain members from fitting masterpieces of antiquity, the poet began piping up his music, simple fellow, thinking to please his listeners. But they getting the whole matter sadly muddled in their minds made such a confused business of listening that not only were they not pleased at the poet﻿’﻿s exertions but no sooner had he done than they burst out against him with violent imprecations.  3


       It’﻿s all one. Richard worked years to conquer the descending cadence, idiotic sentimentalist. Ha, for happiness! This tore the dress in ribbons from her maid’﻿﻿s back and not spared the nails either; wild anger spit from her pinched eyes! This is the better part. Or a child under a table to be dragged out coughing and biting, eyes glittering evilly. I’﻿﻿ll have it my way! Nothing is any pleasure but misery and brokenness. THIS is the only up-cadence. This is where the secret rolls over and opens its eyes. Bitter words spoken to a child ripple in morning light! Boredom from a bedroom doorway thrills with anticipation! The complaints of an old man dying piecemeal are starling chirrups. Coughs go singing on springtime paths across a field; corruption picks strawberries and slow warping of the mind, blacking the deadly walls—counted and recounted—rolls in the grass and shouts ecstatically. All is solved! The moaning and dull sobbing of infants sets blood tingling and eyes ablaze to listen. Speed sings in the heels at long nights tossing on coarse sheets with bruning sockets staring into the black. Dance! Sing! Coil and uncoil! Whip yourselves about! Shout the deliverance! An old woman has infected her blossomy grand-daughter with a blood illness that every two weeks drives the mother into hidden songs of agony, the pad-footed mirage of creeping death for music. The face muscles keep pace. Then a darting about the compass in a tarantelle that wears flesh from bones. Here is dancing! The mind in tatters. And so the music wistfully takes the lead. Ay de mí﻿, Juana la Loca, reina de Españ﻿a, esa está﻿ tu canta, reina mí﻿a!﻿

"
"



XI


 1


       Why pretend to remember the weather two years back? Why not? Listen close then repeat after others what they have just said and win a reputation for vivacity. Oh feed upon petals of edelweiss! one dew drop, if it be from the right flower, is five years’ drink!  _______________

      Having once taken the plunge the situation that preceded it becomes obsolete  which a moment before was alive with malignant rigidities.  2


       When beldams dig clams their fat hams (it’s always beldams) balanced near Tellus’s hide, this rhinoceros pelt, these lumped stone—buffoonery of midges on a bull’s thigh—invoke,—what you will: birth’s glut, awe at God’s craft, youth’s poverty, evolution of a child’s caper, man’s poor inconsequence. Eclipse of all things; sun’s self turned hen’s rump.        Cross a knife and fork and listen to the church bells! It is the harvest moon’s made wine of our blood. Up over the dark factory into the blue glare start the young poplars. They whisper: It is Sunday! It is Sunday! But the laws of the country have been stripped bare of leaves. Out over the marshes flickers our laughter. A lewd anecdote’s the chase. On through the vapory heather! And there at banter’s edge the city looks at us sidelong with great eyes—lifts to its lips heavenly milk! Lucina, O Lucina! beneficent cow, how have we offended thee?  ________________


      Hilariously happy because of some obscure wine of the fancy which they have drunk four rollicking companions take delight in the thought that they have thus evaded the stringent laws of the county. Seeing the distant city bathed in moonlight and staring seriously at them they liken the moon to a cow and its light to milk.

"
"

Remembering the past

And gloating at it now,

I know the frozen brow

And shaking sides of lust

Will dog me at my death

To catch my ghostly breath.

 

          I think that Yeats was right,

          That lust and love are one.

          The body of this night

          May beggar me to death,

          But we are not undone

          Who love with all our breath.

 

                     I know that Proust was wrong,

                     His wheeze: love, to survive,

                     Needs jealousy, and death

                     And lust, to make it strong

                     Or goose it back alive.

                     Proust took away my breath.

 

                                 The later Yeats was right

                                 To think of sex and death

                                 And nothing else. Why wait

                                 Till we are turning old?

                                 My thoughts are hot and cold.

                                 I do not waste my breath.

"
"

I.

 

Sirs, in our youth you love the sight of us.

Older, you fall in love with what we’ve seen,

Would lose yourselves by living in our lives.

I’ll spin you tales, play the Arabian girl;

Working close, alone in the blond arena,

Flourish my cape, the cloth on the camera.

For women learn to be a holy show.

 

I’ll tell you where I’ve been, not what I am:

In Rotterdam, womb where my people sprang,

I find my face, my father, everywhere.

New cousins I must stoop to greet, the get

Of tall, whey-colored burghers, sturdy dams,

As children fed on tulip bulbs and dirt,

Tugged at dry dugs and sucked at winter’s rind.

 

My cousins, dwarfed by war! Your forms rebuke

The butcher and the bystander alike.

To ease you I can’t shrink this big Dutch frame

Got of more comfortable ancestors.

But from my Southern side I pluck a phrase,

“I’ll carry you.” And it means “rest in me,”

To hold you as I may, in my mind’s womb.

 

But snap the album, get the guidebook out!

Rotterdam: her raw, gray waterfront,

Zadkine’s memorial burning on the quay;

This bronze is mortal, gaping in defeat,

The form that wombed it split to let it be.

It mends; he lurches up, in blood reborn,

The empty heavens his eternal frame.

 

 

          II.

 

Move to my room beside the Golden Horn

Where minarets strike fire against the sky.

The architecture: breasts and phalluses.

Where are the words to say that words are lies?

Yeats lied. And here Byzantium lies dead.

Constantinople? Syllables in a text.

Istanbul. Real. Embalmed in dancing dust.

 

Everywhere the dark-brown past gives way

To the beige of progress, that wide vacant lot.

Turkey without coffee! Endlessly we sip tea

From bud vases, and I lust for the guide,

A sultry, serious, pedantic boy

In a tight brown suit, thirsting to get out

Of the triple city weighing on his mind.

 

Oh, he was doomed, doomed like the dogs

On Dog Island, in the sea,

Netted and dumped and exiled, left to die,

Then skinned. We heard imaginary canine howls,

Like the rustlings of a thousand gauzy girls,

Film-eyed cattle, perishing of ennui

In abandoned harems where he guided me.

 

Meanwhile the Faithful, prostrate and intoning,

Stare into the light as blind as death,

Knowing for sure their end is instant Heaven.

We Infidels concede them Paradise,

Having seen heaven-as-harem, a eunuch God

In charge: the virgin slowly fattening to blubber.

Love, become feminized, tickles like a feather.

 

The saints of Art? Sophia, that vast barn

Holds no small Savior waiting to get born.

The formal scribble on the assaulted walls—

Five hundred years of crossing out His name!

Some famous, glittering pebbles mark the place

As God’s most grandiose sarcophagus.

Decay, decay. And the mind, a fetus, dies.

 

 

          III.

 

Return me to the airfield near Shanghai

Where I am very young: shy, apprehensive,

Seated like Sheba on a baggage mountain

Waiting for the first adventure to begin.

The train will glide through fields of rice and men,

Bodies like thongs, and glorious genitals,

Not alien as Chinese, but Adam-strange.

 

Rejoiced by her first look at naked men,

Her soul swims out the window of the train!

She goes where newborn daughters clog the creeks;

Bank-porticoes are strewn with starving rags.

Here the old dragon, China, thrashes, dying.

But the ancient, virile music of the race

Is rising, drenched in gongs and howls of dogs

 

Islanded, the sighs of walled-up women

Dreaming of peasants in their prisoning fields…

But we break out of the harem of history!

No longer that young foreigner on the train,

I listen like a bird, although I ruminate

Like a cow, in my pale Holland body, riven

By love and children. These eyes are what they see.

 Come die with me in the mosques of Rotterdam.

 

"
"

Last night I dreamed I ran through the streets of New York

Looking for help for you, Nicanor.

But my few friends who are rich or influential

were temporarily absent from their penthouses or hotel suites.

They had gone to the opera, or flown for the weekend to Bermuda.

At last I found one or two of them at home,

preparing for social engagements,

absently smiling, as they tried on gown after gown

until heaps of rich, beautiful fabric were strewn

over the chairs and sofas. They posed before mirrors,

with their diamonds and trinkets and floor-length furs.

Smiling at me from the mirror, they vaguely promised help.

They became distracted—by constantly ringing phones,

by obsequious secretaries, bustling in with packages,

flowers, messages, all the paraphernalia,

all part of the uninterruptible rounds of the rich,

the nice rich, smiling soothingly, as they touched their hair

or picked up their phone extensions.

Absently patting my arm, they smiled, “It will be all right.”

 

Dusk fell on the city as I ran, naked, weeping, into the streets.

I ran to the home of Barbara, my friend,

Who, as a young girl, rescued four Loyalist soldiers

from a Spanish prison;

in her teenage sweater set and saddle shoes and knee socks,

she drove an old car sagging with Loyalist pamphlets

across the Pyrenees all the way to Paris without being caught.

And not long ago, she helped save a group of men

from Franco’s sentence of death.

 

In my dream, Barbara telephones Barcelona.

I realize this isn’t quite right,

but I just stand there paralyzed, as one does in dreams.

Then, dimly, from the other end of the line,

through the chatter of international operators,

we hear artillery fire, the faint tones of lost men,

cracked voices singing, “Los Quartros Generales” through the pulsations

of the great, twisted cable under the ocean.Agonía, agonía, sueño, fermente & sueño.Este es el mundo, amigo, agonía, agonía.

 

“No, Barbara!” I scream. ""We are not back there.

That’s the old revolution. Call up the new one.”

Though I know that, every day,

your friends, Nicanor, telephone Santiago,

where the number rings and rings and rings

with never an answer. And now the rings

are turning into knells:

 

The church bells of Santiago

tolling the funeral of Neruda, his poems looted,

his autobiography stolen, his books desecrated

in his house on Isla Negra.

And among the smashed glass, the broken furniture,

his desk overturned, the ruined books strewn over the floor,

lie the great floral wreaths from the Swedish academy,

the wreaths from Paris, South Asia, the whole world over.

And the bells toll on…

Then I tell Barbara to hang up the phone.

 

She dials the number again, then turns to me, smiling,

smiling like an angel:

“He is there.” Trembling, I take the phone from her,

and hear your voice, Nicanor,

sad, humorous, infinitely disillusioned,

infinitely consoling:

“Dear Carolyn…” It is Nicanor!

And the connection is broken, because I wake up,

in this white room, in this white silence,

                   in this backwater of silence

on this Isla Blanca:

                   Nicanor, Nicanor,

are you, too, silent under the earth,

                   Brother, Brother?

"
"

The poets are going home now,

After the years of exile,

After the northern climates

Where they worked, lectured, remembered,

Where they shivered at night

In an indifferent world.

Where God was the god of business,

And men would violate the poets’ moon,

And even the heavens become zones of war.

 

The poets are going home

To the blood-haunted villages,

To the crumbling walls, still pocked

With a spray of bullets;

To the ravine, marked with a new cross,

Where their brother died.

No one knows the precise spot where they shot him,

But there is a place now to gather, to lay wreaths.

The poets will bring flowers.

 

The poets are coming home

To the cafés, to the life of the streets at twilight,

To slip among the crowds and greet their friends;

Thee young poets, old now, limping, who lean on a cane:

Or the arm of a grandchild, peer with opaque eyes

At the frightening city, the steel and concrete towers

Sprung up in their absence.

Yet from open doorways comes the odor of grapes

Fermented, of fish, of oil, of pimiento…

 

The poets have come home

To the melodious language

That settles in their heads like moths alighting,

This language for which they starved

In a world of gutturals,

Crude monosyllables barked by strangers.

Now their own language enfolds them

With its warm vocables.

The poets are home.

 

Yes, they have come back

To look up at the yellow moon,

Cousin of that cold orb that only reflected

Their isolation.

They have returned to the olives, the light,

The sage-scented meadows,

The whitewashed steps, the tubs of geraniums,

The sere plains, the riverbanks spread with laundry,

The poppies, the vineyards, the bones of mountains.

 

Yes, poets, welcome home

To your small country

Riven by its little war

(As the world measures these events),

A country that remembers heroes and tears;

Where, in your absence, souls kept themselves alive

By whispering your words.

Now you smile at everything, even the priests, the militia,

The patient earth that is waiting to receive you.

"
"







Thousands lavishing, thousands starving;       


intrigues, war, flatteries, envyings,     


hypocrisies, lying vanities, hollow amusements,        


exhaustion, dissipation, death—and giddiness        


and laughter, from the first scene to the last.       


—Samuel Palmer, 1858







I. Pan Awakes: Summer Marches In

 

 

               Pan’s

               spring rain

               “drives his victims

               out to the animals

               with whom they become

               as one”—

 

               pain and paeans,

               hung in the mouth,

 

               to be sung

              

 

               II. What the Flowers in the Meadow Tell Me

 

 

               June 6, 1857, Thoreau in his Journal:

 

               A year is made up of a certain series               and number of sensations and thoughts               which have their language in nature…

                Now I am ice, now               I am sorrel.

 

              

               Or, Clare, 1840, Epping Forest:

                I found the poems in the fields               And only wrote them down

 

               and

 

               The book I love is everywhere               And not in idle words

 

               John, claritas tell us the words are not idle,

               the syllables are able

               to turn plantains into quatrains,

              tune raceme to cyme, panicle and umbel to

              form corollas in light clusters of tones…

 

               Sam Palmer hit it:

               “Milton, by one epithet

               draws an oak of the largest girth I ever saw,

               ‘Pine and monumental oak’:

               I have just been trying to draw a large one in

               Lullingstone; but the poet’s tree is huger than

               any in the park.”

 

               Muse in a meadow, compose in

               a mind!

 

 

               III. What the Animals in the Forest Tell Me

 

 

               Harris’s Sparrow—

 

               103 species seen

               by the Georgia Ornithological Society

               in Rabun Gap,

 

               including Harris’s Sparrow, with its

               black crown, face, and bib encircling

               a pink bill

 

 

               It was, I think, the third sighting

               in Georgia, and I should have been there

               instead of reading Clare, listening to

               catbirds and worrying about               Turdus migratorious that flew

               directly into the Volkswagen and

               bounced into a ditch

 

 

               Friend Robin, I cannot figure it, if I’d

               been going 40 you might be

               whistling in some grass.

 

               10 tepid people got 10 stale letters

               one day earlier,

               I cannot be happy

               about that.

 

 

               IV. What the Night Tells Me

 

 

               the dark drones on

               in the southern wheat fields

               and the hop flowers

               open before the sun’s

               beckoning

 

 

               the end

               is ripeness, the wind

               rises,

               and the dawn says

               yes

 

 

               YES! it says

               “yes”

 

 

 

               V. What the Morning Bells Tell Me

 

                Sounds, and sweet aires               that give delight               and hurt not—

 

               that, let

               Shakespeare’s

               delectation

               bear us

 

 

 

               VI. What Love Tells Me

 

 

 

               Anton Bruckner counts the 877th leaf

               on a linden tree in the countryside near Wien

               and prays:

 

               Dear God, Sweet Jesus,

               Save Us, Save Us…

 

               the Light in the Grass,

               the Wind on the Hill,

 

               are in my head,

               the world cannot be heard

 

 

               Leaves obliterate

               my  heart,

 

               we touch each other

               far apart…

 

 

               Let us count

               into

               the Darkness

 

 

"
"

Red-Wigglers, Night-Crawlers

& Other Worms

look out

into the crapulous moonlight:

 

figures of women cascading through the Sunday night;

 

no beer in sight.

 

I remember the Night-bloomingCereus by Dr. Thornton, Engraver, Blake’s

patron, it

hangs in the hall outside the bedroom

swaying hungrily like these

giant white goddesses of the dark grotto…

 

there are touring cars

and men with large guns

singing through the woods

 

behind us.

 

﻿

"
"

I. “If the Night Could Get Up & Walk”

 

        I cannot put my hand into

        a cabbage to turn

        on the light, but

 

        the moon moves over

        the field of dark cabbage and an

        exchange fills

        all veins.

 

        The cabbage is also a globe

        of light, the two globes

 

        now two eyes in

        my saturated

 

        head!

 

 

        II. “One Must Try Behind the Hills”

 

 

        Eight Great Dahlias stood

        beyond the Mountains.

 

        They set fire to the Sun

        in a black wood

        beyond the Mountains,

 

        in the Valley of Vision

        In the Valley of Vision

 

        the Fission of

        Flowers

 

        yields all Power

        in the Valley of Vision.

 

        Eight Suns

        on Eight Stems,

 

        aflame!

﻿

        

"
"







for Robert Duncan ﻿







one comes to language from afar, the ear

fears for its sound-barriers—

 

but one “comes”; the language “comes” forThe Beckoning Fair One plant you now, dig youlater, the plaint stirs winter

earth…

 

air in a hornet’s nest

over the water makes a

solid, six-sided music…

 

a few utterly quiet scenes, things

are very far away—“formis emptiness”

 

comely, comely, love trembles

 

and the sweet-shrub

 

"
"







December 13, 1993 ﻿







John Gordon Boyd

died on the birthday

of three remarkable, and remarkably different, writers:

Heinrich Heine, Kenneth Patchen, Ross McDonald

 

John, too, was just as remarkable, blessed with an inherent “graciousness”

and with extraordinary eyes & ears…

 

 

I think of two texts

on the grievous occasion of his death:

 

“Religion does not help me.

The faith that others give to what is unseen,

I give to what I can touch, and look at.

My Gods dwell in temples

made with hands.”

  — Oscar Wilde, in De Profundis

 

 

and two lines in Rainier Maria Rilke,

John’s favorite poet,

that say it all…

 Was tun Sie, Gott,Wenn ich bin stürbe?

 

“What will you do,

God, when I am dead?”

﻿

"
"







There are more things to love                              


than we would dare to hope for.                             


—Richard of St. Victor ﻿







where the car hit him, fireweed sprang with

blazons of fennel

 

and umbels

of dill fell

through the spokes of a wheel

 

on Whistun holiday to the sun, Denton

Welch spun a web in his crushed cycle,

 

sat in the seat, spine curled up like a spider—

 

and spied: “saw

                 the very drops of sweat glittering frostily

                 between the shoulder blades”

 

                 of a lad

 

…on and on he spied and bled from the blades of his cycle,

small as a spider,

hiding in the fireweed, getting

wet from the skins of many human suns aground

at the Kentish river near

Tunbridge Wells,

 

where the dill

lulls,

 

and all boys

spoil…﻿

"
"

Their singer suffered breakdowns. In their work

there was a sense of what it was to live there at that time.

One song described the dark around the military

vehicles between them and the cocaine waiting

in Gramercy. It was about the sepsis that followed love

or love repeated as farce, the neck neck neck

damaged by an anonymous hand unstringing guitars.

They got away with it and worked to abolish youth

by knitting and paying half-attention. I thought I was

in love because my sentiments were matched

by a generic, abiding sense of unfreedom. Nothing

survives lovers descrying the red flags of old flames.

Nothing is more relatable than an unreasonable person

operating subtractively, indulgently, out of exasperation.﻿

"
"

P. entered a third space

from which he could watch time pass

instead of walking to the monastery

in the middle of the night.

 

His opaque sexuality derived from the absence

of a guarantee that his person would remain intact.

 

He recognized this in himself

and we stared at the pylons regressing

into the lackluster northeastern woods.

 

The monastery was a display

before which he claimed sangfroid

a picturesque ruin to which he was conveyed

as though by boreal fluid.

 

Everyone loved occasional works like this

their allusions to complementary and absent events.

 

Weaving around proliferating drywall

I despaired over this desire.

 

P. joined the migrant workforce

and grew more disconsolate and distant

and drunk in our presence.

 

Our presence was only possible

because of advances in technology

in a dialectical relationship with their debasement:

servers in cold rooms

and a recursive void of woodblock chat sounds.

 

"
"

socalled swan of avon

n/t but a beaurocrat

buggering the buttercups

goy from the waist up

 

now soldiers’re the ones making offers

and fucking caravaggio posters

maybe the artist had bothered about melancholia

 

suddenly xe finds xemself walking down

some dark corridor

 

california was truly the promised land

for a minute there

video marlboro

to show us

 

shoppingcart in dingy water

and then turn melancholical

 

sign reads no squatting

switchd on the cathode ray

at yr coronation

 

the bomb droppd w/ regular monotony

leaving us wanting

 

         a to zed

dampened a grid

 

satyrical deliria

pan’s baallet

in a black tutu

 

who have the inclination

but even whose    necromancer—

firelit but dred—

—commandeering meadows—

protests were pathetic

"
"

swell me a bowl

with lusty oil

brightest under bis

geynest under gore

 

ecce who com

inna persian vestment

                   un monodatal voll

                   marines cd not hoist thee

 

whose eyes go seaward   noreaster reeling

thrashing at the mouth of the gowanus

mischance upbrimmd

 

sludgie helas, aloft

sometimes honeysuckle can smell like MURTHER

 

              yr shining form to oil hath returned

              yr helmet now shall make a hive for bees

 

it was no dream   I lay broad waking

oil blossomed green, incarnadine

 

s/thing keeps

on testing me for tb

 

is politer not to talk about

beastly p.o.v.

 

ludic

like a succubus vomiting ivy

lordly subtler

grotesquerie

 

you can bet it smelled like murther

creped and crinolinnd along the noggin

w/ a victorian western pin

 

till I may see a plumper sludgie swim

everlike rotund

buddha—smack aghast

everlike leo and thir friends

marching in lockstep

to the sunlit uplands.

"
"







for memorial at Zinc Bar, 23 June 2007, NYC                        




I am your sugarplum fairy commodore in chief.                                 


       —kari edwards                             




conturbabimus illa                            


(vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus [let us live,                           


my Lesbia, and let us love])                                 


     —Catullus V.II







damesirs of fishairs

princes reginae

I dont need this botheration

guilded toe in a gendered pension

embedded narcissism

skirts can or could be worn w/

 

intentional disgrace

getting oh-aff

I sleep where I sit

gog and magog

ope myopia

 

sweetness and delight do

it for sidney, as starlover did rue

on star, thir mistress cloying

the lack, with thir poesis toying

 

twill never hurt

regina prince

alack, areft

locks beset

candle agrove

a buck in a corridor

 

as like with likeness grace the tongue

and sweets with sweets cloy them among

 

conturbabimus illa

let us confound them

 

beasts implored and character impaled

agathas breast in a 14th century pincer anon

7 heads w/ 7 comings on

horns on their horns

wings at their feet and at their wings

 well you have three seconds to live

bespeckled apprentice

freckled daylilly

a penny uneasily

pleaded myrtle

 

iron bootblackeningat the speedwe levatate con

there is no missus

I am among

 

limbed elms

colluding with doves

 

nor tide nor tail

angels w/ svelte angles

 

the rub and tug goils

languid as jersey

too early for supper

 

etc was their pimp

and whatever their sucker

shitslinger

master cleanser

 

w/ corporate coffee

and torture pâté

 

my present page

in l-l-livery

 

old glut

of a beast’s spleen

the glory over

lordling socked ajaw

 

nassau ablog

by fairly a sweepmate a swoopster

bedeviled in gullet

swashbuckld by proxy

 homosexuality eh?

red river andaloos

funny albeit friday

all the dork-rock

 

gender suggests

we levitate avec

held captive

patrón, bothermonger

 

ah myrtle

why sie is taken

my mind

impertinent parasol

 

glossy wit promise of salt

caint leave thir cellphone alone

ipode eternal

satellite viscera

 

muscadetted papillon (that one)

 

strident

17 stallions

with horns on their heads

and horns coming out of the horns

 

a papillon

that one

 

a buck in a corridor

conturbabimus illa

let us confound them

 

all ridded of giggling

anthropomorphia aghast

DL in the bowries

the tee hee ambigenuity

of amputee-wannabees

 

googling tee heesilly faggotdicks are for chicks

dicks are for chicks

 

wicked hee

to bury my heart at

my heart was in my knee

"
"

if there is a river

more beautiful than this

bright as the blood

red edge of the moon          if

 

there is a river

more faithful than this

returning each month

to the same delta          if there

 

is a river

braver than this

coming and coming in a surge

of passion, of pain          if there is

 

a river

more ancient than this

daughter of eve

mother of cain and of abel          if there is in

 

the universe such a river          if

there is some where water

more powerful than this wild

water

pray that it flows also

through animals

beautiful and faithful and ancient

and female and brave

  

"
"

somebody coming in blackness

like a star

and the world be a great bush

on his head

and his eyes be fire

in the city

and his mouth be true as time

 

he be calling the people brother

even in the prison

even in the jail

 

i’m just only a baptist preacher

somebody bigger than me coming

in blackness like a star

"
"

the green of Jesus

is breaking the ground

and the sweet

smell of delicious Jesus

is opening the house and

the dance of Jesus music

has hold of the air and

the world is turning

in the body of Jesus and

the future is possible

"
"







for elaine philip on her birthday







me and you be sisters.

we be the same.

me and you

coming from the same place.

me and you

be greasing our legs

touching up our edges.

me and you

be scared of rats

be stepping on roaches.

me and you

come running high down purdy street one time

and mama laugh and shake her head at

me and you.

me and you

got babies

got thirty-five

got black

let our hair go back

be loving ourselves

be loving ourselves

be sisters.

only where you sing

i poet.

"
"

a love person

from love people

out of the afrikan sun

under the sign of cancer.

whoever see my

midnight smile

seeing star apple and

mango from home.

whoever take me for

a negative thing,

his death be on him

like a skin

and his skin

be his heart’s revenge.

 

 

*

 

 

 

 

 

lucy one-eye

she got her mama’s ways.

big round roller

can’t cook

can’t clean

if that’s what you want

you got it world.

 

lucy one-eye

she see the world sideways.

word foolish

she say what she don’t want

to say, she don’t say

what she want to.

 

lucy one-eye

she won’t walk away

from it.

she’ll keep on trying

with her crooked look

and her wrinkled ways,

the darling girl.

 

 

*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

if mama

could see

she would see

lucy sprawling

limbs of lucy

decorating the

backs of chairs

lucy hair

holding the mirrors up

that reflect odd

aspects of lucy.

 

if mama

could hear

she would hear

lucysong rolled in the

corners like lint

exotic webs of lucysighs

long lucy spiders explaining

to obscure gods.

 

if mama

could talk

she would talk

good girl

good girl

good girl

clean up your room.

 

 

*

 

 

 

 

 

i was born in a hotel,

a maskmaker.

my bones were knit by

a perilous knife.

my skin turned around

at midnight and

i entered the earth in

a woman jar.

i learned the world all

wormside up

and this is my yes

my strong fingers;

i was born in a bed of

good lessons

and it has made me

wise.

 

 

*

 

 

 

 

 

 

light

on my mother’s tongue

breaks through her soft

extravagant hip

into life.

lucille

she calls the light,

which was the name

of the grandmother

who waited by the crossroads

in virginia

and shot the whiteman off his horse,

killing the killer of sons.

light breaks from her life

to her lives…

 

mine already is

an afrikan name.

 

 

*

"
"

curling them around

i hold their bodies in obscene embrace

thinking of everything but kinship.

collards and kale

strain against each strange other

away from my kissmaking hand and

the iron bedpot.

the pot is black,

the cutting board is black,

my hand,

and just for a minute

the greens roll black under the knife,

and the kitchen twists dark on its spine

and I taste in my natural appetite

the bond of live things everywhere.

"
"







There should be a writing of non-writing. Someday it will come.                                       

       A brief writing, without grammar, a writing of words alone.                                             

         Words without supporting grammar. Lost. Written, there.                                                                                         

                                                  And immediately left behind.                                                                                                       




                                                                —Marguerite Duras                                                                                    


                                                               (translated by Mark Pollizzotti) ﻿







It came. Words smashed out of the sky and from the mouths and off the pages and from the flesh and blood of the bodies and the words hit the readers and were destroyed like more bodies and the fields of the nation were littered with bodies and dead. Carcass love, they called it. Carcass economy, they called it. And the readers found the carcasses strewn across the pages and the readers came and stripped their innards and twirled intestines above their heads like lassos. The carcasses fell onto the pages and were taken away in wagons and trucks and they were replaced with new carcasses that were sold for words before the flies laid eggs and the wounds had time to fester. FALSE CARCASS ECONOMY! Will the souls of the carcasses miss themselves when they die? Will the bodies whose lips slurp out the souls of the carcasses miss themselves when they die? Will the words from the bodies who slurp out the souls of the carcasses cease to exist when the bodies themselves die? The readers grovel in the pages and find themselves in ditches with the carcasses but they do not know the rules of the false carcass economy. In this book the readers can feel their feet being removed. In this book the readers can feel the splash of the abattoir blood that sprinkles the page with poems. How do you know if the poems have too many bubbles? That is, how do you know if the blood of the poems has too many bubbles? When we speak of our own lives, says the collective voice of the readers, we certainly don’t mean human life. On the page the readers find themselves crawling around like quadrupeds with hands full of grass and earth uprooting plants and trees setting out for home and not getting far counting corpses on the fields to hell with animals there is God grinding his teeth with joy forging his way through the ruins of failing flesh there is the machine that has annihilated the bulk of humanity is it semen or is it a carburetor that makes us unrecognizable we know who we are through decay and in someone else’s story this is a lot worse than knocking your own brains out with good results then drinking tea with sugar and milk and suddenly feeling revived then exploding with words and speaking with animals and sinking in mud and being found by peasants who clean turds and who are like silent gods with holes in their shoes it is horrible to eat horrible to bulge in the belly with food horrible to blink when so many can’t blink oh to ruminate once more on the air polluted with liability on the hair singed from pollution the eyes burning fingers shrivelling the exact moment of ending will not come for many millennia we will not be able to document it it will document us it’s okay to kill some bodies speak of nothing and you’re lucky to make friends flank kidney liver swollen body on the sand who are you now that I am speaking with a mouth full of words that do not belong to me I crawl across the page and I don’t know if I’m dying or dead.

"
"

Here the readers gather to watch the books die. They die suddenly, as if thrown from an airplane, or from spontaneous cardiac arrest. They live, and then suddenly they die, and the reader who watches this is at the moment of the books' death bombarded with images documented through the smiling lipstick face of a journalist who has shown up to report on the death of the books. The milk was poisoned and forty-two babies died, she laughs, as she fondles the ashes of the dead books. And the death of forty-two babies is equal in value to the death of this book which is equal in value to the ninety-year old woman who shot herself while the sheriff waited at her door with an eviction notice which is equal in value to the collapsing of the global economy which is equal to the military in country XYZ seizing the land of the semi-nomadic hunters and cultivators of crops who have lived in the local rain forest for thousands of years. The reader opens a dead book and finds an infinite amount of burnt ash between the bindings, and when the ash blows in the wind the lipstick says that every death in the world is equal to every other death in the world which is equal to every birth in the world which is equal to every act of dismemberment which is equal to the death of a jungle which is equal to the collapse of the global economy; and hey look there’s another lady falling out of a window; she looks about equal to the poet hurled out of his country for words he wrote but which did not belong to him and whose death is about equal to the girl who was shot on the bus on her way to school this morning which is just about the same as the bearded man whose head was shoved into a sac while water was dumped over it and he died for an instant and came back to life and talked and talked and that’s about equal to the steroid illegally injected into the arm of a beautiful man who makes forty million dollars a year for injecting his arms with steroids so he can more skillfully wave a wooden stick at a ball, and in the ash we see the truest democracy there ever was: hey look it’s a little baby found in a dumpster how equal you are says the smiling lipstick to the civilized nation whose citizens walk the flooded streets looking for their homes, and in the ashes of the dead book the dead streets are equal to the eating disorders of movie stars which are equal to the dead soldiers who are equal to the homeruns which are equal to the bomb dropped by country ABC over weddings in the village of country XYZ which is equal to the earth swallowing up and devouring all of its foreigners which is just about equal to the decline in literacy in the most educated nation in the planet. There is no end to this book. There are no paragraph breaks to interrupt the smiling lipstick that goes on and on in one string of ashy words about how the declaration of peace is equal to the resumption of war and how the bodies that fall are equal to the birds that ascend and how the bomb in the Eiffel Tower is equal to the rising cost of natural gas, and the murmurs of the voices in the mud are equal to the murmurs of the expensive suits falling out of buildings and these are equal to the silence that kills with one breath and coddles life with another.

"
"







for Richard Griffith







1  THE BURNING

 

Girl grown woman     fire     mother of fire

I go to the stone street turning to fire.     Voices

Go screaming     Fire     to the green glass wall.

And there where my youth flies blazing into fire

The     dance     of sane and insane images, noon

Of seasons and days.     Noontime of my one hour.

 

Saw down the bright noon street the crooked faces

Among the tall daylight in the city of change.

The scene has walls     stone     glass     all my gone life

One wall a web through which the moment walks

And I am open, and the opened hour

The world as water-garden     lying behind it.

In a city of stone, necessity of fountains,

Forces water fallen on glass, men with their axes.

 

An arm of flame reaches from water-green glass,

Behind the wall I know waterlilies

Drinking their light, transforming light and our eyes

Skythrown under water, clouds under those flowers,

Walls standing on all things stand in a city noon

Who will not believe a waterlily fire.

Whatever can happen in a city of stone,

Whatever can come to a wall can come to this wall.

 

I walk in the river of crisis toward the real,

I pass guards, finding the center of my fear

And you, Dick, endlessly my friend during storm.

 

The arm of flame striking through the wall of form.

 

 

2  THE ISLAND

 

Born of this river and this rock island, I relate

The changes : I born when the whirling snow

Rained past the general’s grave and the amiable child

White past the windows of the house of Gyp the Blood.

General, gangster, child.     I know in myself the island.

 

I was the island without bridges, the child down whose blazing

Eye the men of plumes and bone raced their canoes and fire

Among the building of my young childhood, houses;

I was those changes, the live darknesses

Of wood, the pale grain of a grove in the fields

Over the river fronting red cliffs across—

And always surrounding her the river, birdcries, the wild

Father building his sand, the mother in panic her parks—

Bridges were thrown across, the girl arose

From sleeping streams of change in the change city.

The violent forgetting, the naked sides of darkness.

Fountain of a city in growth, and island of light and water.

Snow striking up past the graves, the yellow cry of spring.

 

Whatever can come to a city can come to this city.

Under the tall compulsion

                                                   of the past

I see the city

                          change like a man changing

I love this man

                               with my lifelong body of love

I know you

                        among your changes

                                                                  wherever I go

Hearing the sounds of building

                                                          the syllables of wrecking

A young girl watching

                                              the man throwing red hot rivets

Coals in a bucket of change

How can you love a city that will not stay?

I love you

                       like a man of life in change.

 

Leaves like yesterday shed, the yellow of green spring

Like today accepted and become one’s self

I go, I am a city with bridges and tunnels,

Rock, cloud, ships, voices.     To the man where the river met

The tracks, now buried deep along the Drive

Where blossoms like sex pink, dense pink, rose, pink, red.

 

Towers falling.     A dream of towers.

Necessity of fountains.     And my poor,

Stirring among our dreams,

Poor of my own spirit, and tribes, hope of towers

And lives, looking out through my eyes.

The city the growing body of our hate and love.

The root of the soul, and war in its black doorways.

A male sustained cry interrupting nightmare.

Male flower heading upstream.

 

Among a city of light, the stone that grows.

Stigma of dead stone, inert water, the tattered

Monuments rivetted against flesh.

Blue noon where the wall made big agonized men

Stand like sailors pinned howling on their lines, and I

See stopped in time a crime behind green glass,

Lilies of all my life on fire.

Flash faith in a city building its fantasies.

 

I walk past the guards into my city of change.

 

 

3  JOURNEY CHANGES

 

Many of us     Each in his own life waiting

Waiting to move     Beginning to move     Walking

And early on the road of the hill of the world

Come to my landscapes emerging on the grass

 

The stages of the theatre of the journey

 

I see the time of willingness between plays

Waiting and walking and the play of the body

Silver body with its bosses and places

One by one touched awakened into into

 

Touched and turned one by one into     flame

 

The theatre of the advancing goddess     Blossoming

Smiles as she stands intensely being in stillness

Slowness in her blue dress advancing standing I go

And far across a field over the jewel grass

 

The play of the family stroke by stroke acted out

 

Gestures of deep acknowledging on the journey stages

Of the playings the play of the goddess and the god

A supple god of searching and reaching

Who weaves his strength     Who dances her more alive

 

The theatre of all animals, my snakes, my great horses

 

Always the journey     long     patient     many haltings

Many waitings for choice and again easy breathing

When the decision to go on is made

Along the long slopes of choice and again the world

 

The play of poetry approaching in its solving

 

Solvings of relations in poems and silences

For we were born to express     born for a journey

Caves, theatres, the companioned solitary way

And then I came to the place of mournful labor

 

A turn in the road and the long sight from the cliff

 

Over the scene of the land dug away to nothing and many

Seen to a stripped horizon carrying barrows of earth

A hod of earth taken and emptied and thrown away

Repeated farther than sight.     The voice saying slowly

 

But it is hell.     I heard my own voice in the words

Or it could be a foundation     And after the words

My chance came.     To enter.     The theatres of the world.

 

 

4  FRAGILE

 

I think of the image brought into my room

Of the sage and the thin young man who flickers and asks.

He is asking about the moment when the Buddha

Offers the lotus, a flower held out as declaration.

“Isn’t that fragile?” he asks.     The sage answers:

“I speak to you.     You speak to me.     Is that fragile?”

 

 

5  THE LONG BODY

 

This journey is exploring us. Where the child stood

An island in a river of crisis, now

The bridges bind us in symbol, the sea

Is a bond, the sky reaches into our bodies.

We pray : we dive into each other’s eyes.

 

Whatever can come to a woman can come to me.

 

This is the long body : into life from the beginning,

Big-headed infant unfolding into child, who stretches and finds

And then flowing the young one going tall, sunward,

And now full-grown, held, tense, setting feet to the ground,

Going as we go in the changes of the body,

As it is changes, in the long strip of our many

Shapes, as we range shifting through time.

The long body : a procession of images.

 

This moment in a city, in its dream of war.

                                              We chose to be,

Becoming the only ones under the trees

                                                                            when the harsh sound

Of the machine sirens spoke. There were these two men,

And the bearded one, the boys, the Negro mother feeding

Her baby. And threats, the ambulance with open doors.

Now silence. Everyone else within the walls. We sang.

                               We are the living island,

We the flesh of this island, being lived,

Whoever knows us is part of us today.

 

Whatever can happen to anyone can happen to me.

 

Fire striking its word among us, waterlilies

Reaching from darkness upward to a sun

Of rebirth, the implacable.     And in our myth

The Changing Woman who is still and who offers.

 

Eyes drinking light, transforming light, this day

That struggles with itself, brings itself to birth.

In ways of being, through silence, sources of light

Arriving behind my eye, a dialogue of light.

 

And everything a witness of the buried life.

This moment flowing across the sun, this force

Of flowers and voices body in body through space.

The city of endless cycles of the sun.

 

I speak to you     You speak to me

 

"
"







     for Robert Payne







Great Alexander sailing was from his true course turned

By a young wind from a cloud in Asia moving

Like a most recognizable most silvery woman;

Tall Alexander to the island came.

The small breeze blew behind his turning head.

He walked the foam of ripples into this scene.

 

The trunk of the speaking tree looks like a tree-trunk

Until you look again.     Then people and animals

Are ripening on the branches;     the broad leaves

Are leaves;     pale horses, sharp fine foxes

Blossom;     the red rabbit falls

Ready and running.     The trunk coils, turns,

Snakes, fishes.     Now the ripe people fall and run,

Three of them in their shore-dance, flames that stand

Where reeds are creatures and the foam is flame.

 

Stiff Alexander stands.     He cannot turn.

But he is free to turn : this is the speaking tree,

It calls your name.     It tells us what we mean.

"
"

THE WAY OUT

 

The night is covered with signs. The body and face of man,

with signs, and his journeys.     Where the rock is split

and speaks to the water;     the flame speaks to the cloud;

the red splatter, abstraction, on the door

speaks to the angel and the constellations.

The grains of sand on the sea-floor speak at last to the noon.

And the loud hammering of the land behind

speaks ringing up the bones of our thighs, the hoofs,

we hear the hoofs over the seethe of the sea.

 

All night down the centuries, have heard, music of passage.

 

Music of one child carried into the desert;

firstborn forbidden by law of the pyramid.

Drawn through the water with the water-drawn people

led by the water-drawn man to the smoke mountain.

The voice of the world speaking, the world covered by signs,

the burning, the loving, the speaking, the opening.

Strong throat of sound from the smoking mountain.

Still flame, the spoken singing of a young child.

The meaning beginning to move, which is the song.

 

Music of those who have walked out of slavery.

 

Into that journey where all things speak to all things

refusing to accept the curse, and taking

for signs the signs of all things, the world, the body

which is part of the soul, and speaks to the world,

all creation being created in one image, creation.

This is not the past walking into the future,

the walk is painful, into the present, the dance

not visible as dance until much later.

These dancers are discoverers of God.

 

We knew we had all crossed over when we heard the song.

 

Out of a life of building lack on lack:

the slaves refusing slavery, escaping into faith:

an army who came to the ocean: the walkers

who walked through the opposites, from I to opened Thou,

city and cleave of the sea. Those at flaming Nauvoo,

the ice on the great river: the escaping Negroes,

swamp and wild city: the shivering children of Paris

and the glass black hearses; those on the Long March:

all those who together are the frontier, forehead of man.

 

Where the wilderness enters, the world, the song of the world.

 

Akiba rescued, secretly, in the clothes of death

by his disciples carried from Jerusalem

in blackness journeying to find his journey

to whatever he was loving with his life.

The wilderness journey through which we move

under the whirlwind truth into the new,

the only accurate. A cluster of lights at night:

faces before the pillar of fire. A child watching

while the sea breaks open. This night. The way in.

 

Barbarian music, a new song.

 

Acknowledging opened water, possibility:

open like a woman to this meaning.

In a time of building statues of the stars,

valuing certain partial ferocious skills

while past us the chill and immense wilderness

spreads its one-color wings until we know

rock, water, flame, cloud, or the floor of the sea,

the world is a sign, a way of speaking. To find.

What shall we find? Energies, rhythms, journey.

 

Ways to discover. The song of the way in.

"
"

Murmurs from the earth of this land, from the caves and craters,

       from the bowl of darkness. Down watercourses of our

       dragon childhood, where we ran barefoot.

We stand as growing women and men. Murmurs come down

        where water has not run for sixty years.

Murmurs from the tulip tree and the catalpa, from the ax of

        the stars, from the house on fire, ringing of glass; from

        the abandoned iron-black mill.

Stars with voices crying like mountain lions over forgotten

        colors.

Blue directions and a horizon, milky around the cities where the

        murmurs are deep enough to penetrate deep rock.

Trapping the lightning-bird, trapping the red central roots.

You know the murmurs. They come from your own throat.

You are the bridges to the city and the blazing food-plant green;

The sun of plants speaks in your voice, and the infinite shells of

        accretions

A beach of dream before the smoking mirror.

You are close to that surf, and the leaves heated by noon, and

        the star-ax, the miner’s glitter walls. The crests of the sea

Are the same strength you wake with, the darkness is the eyes

        of children forming for a blaze of sight and soon, soon,

Everywhere your own silence, who drink from the crater, the

        nebula, one another, the changes of the soul.

"
"

Deeper than sleep but not so deep as death

I lay there dreaming and my magic head

remembered and forgot. On first cry I

remembered and forgot and did believe.

I knew love and I knew evil:

woke to the burning song and the tree burning blind,

despair of our days and the calm milk-giver who

knows sleep, knows growth, the sex of fire and grass,

renewal of all waters and the time of the stars

and the black snake with gold bones.

 

Black sleeps, gold burns; on second cry I woke

fully and gave to feed and fed on feeding.

Gold seed, green pain, my wizards in the earth

walked through the house, black in the morning dark.

Shadows grew in my veins, my bright belief,

my head of dreams deeper than night and sleep.

Voices of all black animals crying to drink,

cries of all birth arise, simple as we,

found in the leaves, in clouds and dark, in dream,

deep as this hour, ready again to sleep.

"
"

My liveliest self, I give you fair leave

in these windblown weathers,

heather-hearted and human and strange,

to turn every blackberry corner

of yesterday’s summer.

 

The robin, singing her love-me-forever,

kiss-catch-clutch-in the heather

blues, sings tide flow

and autumn’s turning and white

winds folding.

 

Cattle along all hedges wind winter

into their frosty

breathing, their slow eyes dreaming

barn, bullock, and fodder

under all hedges.

 

But sea cave and sycamore tell us the world

is wider than weather.

Blackberries darken the corners

I turn, and gold seas turning

darken, darken.

 

My liveliest self, my other, Godspeed

on our farings.

The bronze path at evening.            Toward summer,

then.                        My hand, your hand—

as if first meeting.

"
"

At dusk, a great flare of winter lightning photographed the bay:

Waves were broken scrolls.          Beyond Donegal, white mountains

hung in a narrow bas-relief frozen on sky.

 

                                                                            Later, there was sleet: trees down

on the Drumholm road; near Timoney’s farm, a frantic goose

pinned under branches.

 

                                        All night long, we spoke of loneliness,

long winter, while winter sang in the chimneys.

 

Then the sky cleared and a marvel began: The hills turned blue;

in the valley a blue cottage sent up the day’s first plume of smoke.

It gathered like a dream drenched in frost.

 

That should have been all.                           We had worn out night.

 

But single-file,  deliberate,  five heifers,  a black bull,  three calves stepped  through the

                                                                                                                                    broken fence.

They arranged themselves between the house and hedge: a kind of diagram:

a shifting pattern grazing frozen weeds.

 

Their image is with me still.               The backs of the cattle are patchy with frost blue as

                                                                                                                                     morning.

"
"

The giant takes us

down. A man with no arms.

Unbreakable.

 

What made today

is concordant,

transforms

the brief decisive phase we call fear.

 

I look to that whited-over part and see a face.

Then I look to the black and

see the same face.

 There were tunnels…chambersbeneath some of the sidewalks…page after page of places… 

The last thing you think of.

Won’t be my fluffy blonde hair.

 

We have his ear.

He was the first boy I knew. The liberation.

Which I remember

from sand. The pail shape. The whole world’s washed out.

 

These words: take refuge.

What I mean by dream in this case is

his last dream.

And you see no land, you’re that far away.

 

Someone coughs

in my first life.

Someone must have noticed

how like you he is…

 

First you can’t be heard

Then you can’t hear

Then you can’t dial

Then you can’t turn it off

 You pose a question, I repeat it.And as always with speech, one is blind.

 

As a reflector, as of cloth or

thick flecked glass, as slats—

You asked though

 

about the self.

There were fireflies,

and the corn cut to the nubs. The windows

shook, we saw a flash of light…

 

then the tiniest

feckles

of rain

 

after we waited

all day.

"
"

Men are trading their bullets for worms.


“I spent a lifetime building.”


 


We come down from the mountains. We brought eggs, a table, a windowshade. There were times when we couldn’t bring anything. So many people.


 


As you were walking up the hill and I was walking down, we almost passed each other. But I grasped your arm and backed up. You said: “This is what I look like now.”


﻿

"
"

She considers a field. She considers a field and buys it. Let her have the fruit of her hands.


 


We come down from the mountains. Yellow trees, green trees. I was leaving Earth but, before I did, I had to get rid of all my animals. My main one, my main model for behavior, was my snake. He was attached to the bottom of my foot but had become dangerous seeming and I was afraid he would bite me if he got the chance. My sister was there and I said, “Before I leave, I have to get rid of all my animals,” thinking maybe she’d help me. I said, “My horse, my frog, my snake…” but didn’t mention I was worried about how to dislodge my snake safely. As I was waking up, I thought of going to a place where they could give the snake a shot to knock it out or even kill it before they tried to get it off my foot. Which seemed like a pretty good idea, though inconvenient.

"
"

i would be eight people and then the difficulties vanish

only as one i contain the complications

in a warm house roofed with the rib-cage of an elephant

i pass my grey mornings re-running the reels

and the images are the same but the emphasis shifts

the actors bow gently to me and i envy them

their repeated parts, their constant presence in that world

i would be eight people each inhabiting the others’ dreams

walking through corridors of glass framed pages

telling each other the final lines of letters

picking fruit in one dream and storing it in another

only as one i contain the complications

and the images are the same, their constant presence in that world

the actors bow gently to me and envy my grey mornings

 

i would be eight people with the rib-cage of an elephant

picking fruit in a warm house above actors bowing

re-running the reels of my presence in this world

the difficulties vanish and the images are the same

eight people, glass corridors, page lines repeated

inhabiting grey mornings roofed with my complications

only as one walking gently storing my dream

"
"







(for John Barrell) ﻿







1. gone to lunch back in five minutes

 

night closed in on my letter of resignation

out in the square one of my threads had broken loose

the language i used was no and no

while the yellow still came through, the hammer and the drills

 

occasionally the metabolism alters

and lines no longer come express

waiting for you what muscles work me

which hold me down below my head?

 

it is a long coat and a van on the horizon

a bird that vanishes    the arabic

i learn from observation is how to break the line

 

(genius creates surprises : the metropolitan

police band singing ‘bless this house’

 

as the filmed extractor fans inflate the house with steam

 

 

2. walking my back home

 

the wind

is the wind

is a no-vo-cain band

 

and the footstep

                          echoes

 i 

have conjured people

 

 

3. ah, it all falls into place

 

when it was time what he had left became a tile

bodies held shaped by the pressure of air

were clipped to his attention by their gestures

 

my but we do have powerful muscles

each of us equal to gravity

or sunlight that forces our shadows

into the pieces of a fully interlocking puzzle

 

 

4. good morning he whispered

 

the horrors of the horses are the crows

the bird flies past the outside the library

many heels have trapped the same way

he tolls, he lapsed with the light from so many trees

 

check the pattern swerves with the back

the tree that holds the metal spiral staircase swings

aloft the hand removes a book and checked it

for death by glasses or the angle food descends

 

 

5. the broadcast

 

she turns me on she turns on me

that the view from the window is a lake

and silent cars are given the noise of flies dying in the heat

of the library    the grass outside goes brown

in my head behind my glasses behind the glass in the precinct

thus, too, they whisper in museums and banks

"
"

a line of faces borders the strangler’s work

heavy european women

mist blows over dusty tropical plants

lit from beneath the leaves by a spotlight

mist in my mind a riffled deck

 

of cards or eccentrics

was i

a waterton animal my head

is not my own

 

poetry is neither swan nor owl

but worker, miner

digging each generation deeper

through the shit of its eaters

to the root – then up to the giant tomato

 

someone else’s song is always behind us

as we wake from a dream trying to remember

step onto a thumbtack

 

two worlds – we write the skin

the surface tension that holds

                                       you

                                       in

what we write is ever the past

 

curtain pulled back

a portrait behind it

is a room suddenly lit

 

looking out through the eyes

at a t.v. programme

of a monk sealed into a coffin

 

we close their eyes and ours

and still here the tune

 

moves on

 

 

 

﻿

"
"







(for Ed and Jenny) ﻿







greetings

as the door opened

ticking

 

please listen to this

food alone for all

the f.b.i. will continue

 

maybe you dozed off

i hung by that phone all night

suppose he talks

 

*

 

vida

 

later

 

aria

 

*

 

once upon a time

not looking for any thing

 

*

 

you’re on

your own

it’s off

it’s on

 

*

 

perhaps it means

ragged like that

golda my-yeer

         pre-meer

 

*

 

and pour the old box

down a drain

 

*

 

too  much news

said the news

 

*

 

r e  o l e

 

*

 

it’s us

or rust

listener

 

*

 

deep

 

personal

 

regret

 

looking

 

up

 

monday

 

*

 

we can save

your head or your body

we can shave

 

*

 

even

his admission

is

a subtle lie

 

*

 

in suspense

what is cut into

the smallest of the

 

*

 

grinding

 

to fill

 

a prescription

 

*

 

drum to the wobble and a roll on the sea

come to mind an article of light

distance through distance unfinished

 

*

 

piano

 

*

 

willing to believe

 

*

 

national

 

anthem

 

hearer

 

*

 

perfect rhyme to some

 

all cars

 

kept in doors

 

*

 

sophisticated

newsmen

show how

it could have been

 

*

retreat

from the swiss

legation

 

*

 

numbers

for an event

 

*

 

corruption

why not?

 

*

 

infinite

 

detail

 

is no more real

 

*

 

thought

 

             against

 

                          power

 

*

 

answer

 

 

it

 

*

 

hooked

to just another

piece of tape

hooked

to just one more

little piece of tape

 

*

 

through words in to

no

record

 

 

*

 

writer

 

righter

 

riter

 

*

 

am:

 

i

 

on replay?

 

*

 

all you

do is

expand

the system

 

*

 

a polaroid

of la

with the wrong

voice print

 

*

 

astronaut

amazed

at what

was expected

"
"

lonely as four cherries on a tree

at night, new moon, wet roads

a moth or a snowflake

whipping past glass

 

lonely as the red noses of four clowns

thrust up through snow

their shine four whitened panes

drawn from imagined memory

 

lonely as no other lives

touching to recorded water

all objects stare

their memories aware

 

lonely as pain

recoiling from itself

imagining the cherries

and roses reaching out

 

"
"

I did something I could never discuss

made an acquaintance

and embraced him in a phone booth.

 

While interested parties lurked

among free newspaper boxes

he removed his domino.

 

What to construe

from leather bracelets?

The impossibility of translation

from a phone booth to a churchyard

 

a gate painted white

a belfry with no bell

some culture with haceks

the sense of lolling in a park

 

from a churchyard to a community garden

heckling the rooster as it crowed.

 

We left the part we liked

jeering the rooster from a sward.

 

We reentered the garden with a script

but refused to expand on the vestiges of happiness.

 

A girl took responsibility for the garden

and plied us with background information

until her nervous guardian sent us back to the church

with a coat of arms where we were going anyway

as though under the influence of boreal fluid.

 

The songbirds of the yard

were about to be contaminated

by a new age concert.

 

With so little at stake

they praised positive thinking.﻿

"
"







But I have been familiar with ruins too long to dislike desolation.      


(Lord Byron, November 1816) ﻿







what happens in any

 

sovereign body is created

 

on the evidence of the last

 

head on its last lap

 

those of us watching

 

then, during the programme

 

see the die seem to be cast

 

to draw the teeth

 

of our first question

 

affecting essential interests

 

they and only they had

 

she was dealing with

 

an unworthy family

 

gathered for death

 

inconvenient location

 

gruesome tired mannerisms

 

a bit thick coming from her

 

losing the thread of argument

 

in a sinuous cartwheel

 

drained of what life

 

hurried out with a pushchair

 

unsparing he takes us

 

to the cabaret

 

into patterns and groups

 

contrived for distraction

 

more likely

 

to deepen withdrawal

 

such a decrease

 

in which women

 

had views diametrically opposed

 

soon changes his tune

 

howling

 

face to face

 

cruel for people

 

recoiling in horror

 

plastered indeed

 

by any form of social

 

charges and interest

 

it may be healthy

 

to change the tone

 

of administration

 

in growth dynamics

 

use of perspective

 

attachment to things

 

entail perpetual disruption

 

of what space is for

 

built up

 

in absence

 

transactions typically occur

 

under conditions of heightened

 

variations in taste

 

spaces, isolated thoughts

 

which his concept of beauty

 

distorts to represent

 

thinking and feeling life

 

he considers in particular

 

superimposed spatial images

 

accelerating production

 

of different times

 

to control the future

 

this book has been edited

to detect the note

 

of such preoccupations

 

blue evening light

 

desire out of stasis

 

for jobs

 

investment itself

 

ruthless traders

 

organising forces

 

unable to stop the drift

 

of imagination over materiality

 

form an autobiography

 

in fires of competition

 

only to emerge stronger

 

within this system of production

 

brought into our homes

 

which in turn form the basis

 

of generating and acquiring

 

aesthetic pleasure

 

conventional these days

 

cluttered with illusion

 

based on writing

 

remixed

 

to demolish any narrative

 

of the world within

 

no image concealed

 

from the realm of material

 

accumulation and circulation

 

in part as would be true

 

enduring time

 

by herself he touches her

 

surrounded by models

 

able to pass unrecognised

 

in the stream of money

 

implied by a photograph

 

where the sun never seen

 

can be constructed

 

crashing through layer after layer

 

on a depthless screen

 

with the requisite speed

 

somewhere behind us

 

thrown into the street

 

patiently to see

 

rotting pieces of car

 

buttons working backwards

 

against nerve junctions

 

tilt her head

 

towards her ankles

 

in the underground light

 

black fur gleamed

 

off the oil drum

 

searchers found

 

a delicate bubble of oil

 

sweeping through it

 

pure oxygen

 

dawn touched

 

at the corners

 

rose in flame

 

lengths of thin steel

 

drawn across dust

 

shifting in thick

 

time on

 

motions playing out

 

across from me

 

not in sequence

 

cut into the sides

 

of an extension run

 

below his eyes

 

were tombstones

 

ringed with razor-wire

 

he threaded

 

bright slashes of colour

 

through open

 

jolts of fear

 

measuring, calculating

 

shaking so hard

 

a lump of shadow

 

watching

 

turned from side to side

 

shielding us from the sun

 

pale green glass

 

frames disintegrating tarmac

 

down to the tunnel

 

of the corner of his eye

 

moving on

 

to some other

 

man for the moment

 

horizon of empty water

 

locking him away

 

inside and he wore

 

two pictograms

 

set in strange lines

 

invisible in air

 

energetically above them

 

heels and silk

 

scatter snow

 

in the middle of a room

 

swirling out of the mist

 

bright with arrangements

 

tainted too historically

 

he had forgotten

 

quite violent fights

 

listening

 

to the continuous pounding

 

of some other thought

 

looking at the surface

 

far away down

 

in a cloud of dust

 

tattered lace about her

 

she watched him calmly

 

bits of it he tore off

 

at the end of each meeting

 

seemed colour-coded

 

sparkling violently

 

tingling on his skin

 

holes turned round slowly

 

in brown earth

 

lined with age

 

he smelled burning

 

trees in darkness

 

a voice came

 

from an imaginary telephone

 

on the dashboard

 

shrink-wrapped packages

 

soft underfoot

 

glowed in the dark

 

blinds slanted to make

 

the match flame

 

blast across his face

 

snap shut

 

in the jungle

 

after the ones still alive

 

start confessing

 

flashbulbs go off

 

her hand flicked back and forth

 

over a section of floor

 

he had heard more

 

than every single word

 

from the once proud

 

ruins of arches

 

in one outstretched hand

 

an odd sensation

 

included balance

 

working to repair the damage

 

of triumph on his face

 

folded against the edge

 

of exhaust fumes

 

closing his lids

 

properly needed great care

 

she heard a rustle

 

little numbers

 

flew around trees

 

tumbled across a moonlit field

 

trying to reassemble

 

his head again

 

she blinked

 

some sort of code

 

subtle variations

 

in the colour of her eyes

 

a reliable testing ground

 

gardens inside shelters

 

shades patterning

 

an idealised culture

 

in one landscaped clump

 

stuffed full of shells

 

a version or remnant of something

 

under a different name

 

some crisis of identity

 

spanned the world

 

thought was the only thing

 

to come back to acting

 

beyond acoustics

 

even when dramatic

 

she always wore fancy dress

 

simply cut and held low

 

objects grouped together

 

confidently into fine jewellery

 

after the storm new scents

 

touched by salt spray

 

hardly dimmed the harsh light

 

he sometimes pulled at his hair

 

obsessed with finding the beautiful

 

curtain allowing him entry

 

never able to follow

 

the middle of night

 

downwards to find a runway

 

with deep sides

 

writhing under his fingers

 

personalities full of energy

 

order a series

 

of the same programme

 

cool for film

 

using this knowledge

 

machines talk to themselves

 

maintain a very persistent

 

buzzing as the signal

 

ends in a dramatic freeze

 

close to the border

 

on a street with a few orange trees

"
"







for Jack Kerouac ﻿







IN LIGHT ROOM IN DARK HELL IN UMBER IN CHROME,

     I sit feeling the swell of the cloud made about by movement

 

                 of arm leg and tongue. In reflections of gold

           light. Tints and flashes of gold and amber spearing

                     and glinting. Blur glass…blue Glass,

 

             black telephone. Matchflame of violet and flesh

                 seen in the clear bright light. It is not night

 

                and night too. In Hell, there are stars outside.

            And long sounds of cars. Brown shadows on walls

                                       in the light

                           of the room. I sit or stand

 

                 wanting the huge reality of touch and love.

            In the turned room. Remember the long-ago dream

 

          of stuffed animals (owl, fox) in a dark shop. Wanting

             only the purity of clean colors and new shapes

                                     and feelings.

                 I WOULD CRY FOR THEM USELESSLY

 

                   I have ten years left to worship my youth

                      Billy the Kid, Rimbaud, Jean Harlow

  IN DARK HELL IN LIGHT ROOM IN UMBER AND CHROME I

                                                                                            feel the swell of

smoke the drain and flow of motion of exhaustion, the long sounds of cars

                                                                                                     the brown shadows
